[[Spiritual Meadow]]
 
This same Abba Theodoulos spoke to us again, saying:  
 
There is a hostel here, near the lighthouse, between the Church of Saint Sophia and the Church of Saint Faustus, with a guest-master in charge. One day this man invited me to go up to the hostel to replace him for a few days. When I got there, I found a monk staying there as a guest, a Syrian by race. His only possessions were a hair shirt, a cloak and a few loaves of bread. He stood there, in a corner, all the time: night and day, uttering verses of the psalms and greeting nobody. When the holy day of the Lord came around J went to him and said: ‘Brother, will you not come to the Church of Saint Sophia, sir, to partake of the holy and venerable mysteries?’ He said he would not, so 1 asked him why not. He replied that he was a partisan of Severus and was not in communion with the Church. When I heard that he was not in communion with the holy catholic and apostolic Church—and yet I had seen his excellent behaviour and his blameless way of life, I went to my cell in tears. I closed the door and threw myself on my face before God. For three days I prayed to him with many tears, saying: ‘Oh Master, Christ our God, who of your ineffable and inestimable love for mankind did bend the heavens and come down Ps 104:2 for our salvation and was incarnate of our Lady, the holy Mother of God, the ever-virgin Mary: reveal to me who are the right and proper believers; we, who are of the Church, or those who are followers of Severus’. On the third day, a voice with no visible source came to me, saying: ‘Theodoulos, go and behold his faith’. So the next day I went and sat down before the Syrian, expecting to see something, in view of what the voice had said. I remained sitting there for an hour, looking at him; and ‘he stood there, uttering verses in Syriac. ‘And then, children,—the Lord is my witness! I saw a dove, blackened with soot, hovering above his head. It looked as though it had been in a kitchen, for it was plucked and ugly. I realised that this blackened and disgusting dove which had appeared to me was his faith.’ His blessed soul told us this in ail truth, with many sighs and tears.
