[[Spiritual Meadow]]
 
We visited Abba Athanasios at the lavra of our saintly father, Sabas, and he told us a story which he had heard from Abba Athenogenes, Bishop of Petra, the son of Amma Damiana. It was something like this:  
 
My grandmother, Joanna, had a brother called Adelphios who was bishop of Arabessi. She also had a sister who was higoumené of the women’s monastery. One day the bishop went to the monastery to visit his sister. As he was entering the inner court of the monastery, he saw one of the sisters, afflicted by a demon, stretched out on the ground, The bishop called his sister and said to her: ‘Does it please you that the sister is afflicted and troubled by the demon? Do you not realise that, as higoumené, you are responsible for all the sisters?’ She said to him: ‘And what have the demon and I to do  
 
with each other?’ The bishop spoke to her again: ‘What have you been doing here all these years?’ He offered a prayer and cleansed the sister of the demon.  
 
The same Athanasios also told us this concerning the same  
 
Bishop Adelphios, which he had heard from Amma Joanna, his sister: When John Chrysostom, Bishop of Constantinople, was exiled to Coucouson, he stayed at our house; from which we drew much boldness and love towards God. My brother, Adelphios, said that when the blessed John died in exile, it was an unbearable pain to him that such a man, the universal teacher of christendom who made glad the church of God with his words, should have fallen asleep away from his episcopal seat. I prayed to God with many tears to show me his present state of existence and whether he was ranged among the patriarchs. I prayed like that for a long time and then, one day, I fell into a trance and saw a very fine-looking man. Taking me by the right hand, he led me into a bright and glorious place where he showed me the proclaimers of piety and the doctors of the church. For my part, I looked around for him whom I so greatly desired to sce, the great John, my beloved. He showed me them all and spoke the name of each one of them, then he took my hand again, and led me out. I followed, lamenting that I had not seen the saintly John among the fathers, As we were coming out, he who stood at the door said to me: ‘Nobody who comes here goes forth sorrowing’, Then I said to him: ‘This grief is upon me because I have not scen my most dear John, Bishop of Constantinople, among the other doctors’. Again he spoke to me: ‘Do you mean John [the prince] of repentance? A man in the flesh cannot see him, for he stands in the presence of the Lord’s throne.’ 
