[[Spiritual Meadow]]
 
[When we met Abba John at the Lavra of the Aliotes, he told us this story:]  
 
There was an anchorite in the region of the holy Jordan whose name was Theodore, He came to my cell and said: ‘Of your charity, brother John, find me a book which contains all the New Testa- ment’, I made enquiries and discovered that Abba Peter, who became Bishop of Chalcedon, possessed such a book. I went and  
 
spoke with him and he showed me a copy of the New Testament-  
 
written on extremely fine skins. I asked him how much it was and he told me: ‘Three pieces of gold’, But then he added: ‘Is it you yourself who wants to buy it, or somebody else?’ I said: ‘believe me, father, it is an anchorite who wants it’. Then Abba Peter said to me: ‘If the anchorite wants it, take it to him graciS, Here too are three pieces of gold. If he does not like the book, there are the three pieces of gold; buy him what he wants’. I took up the book and brought it to the anchorite. He took it and went off into the wilderness. Two months later the anchorite returned and came to my cell saying: ‘You know, Abba John, the thought troubles me that I got the book for nothing’. I told“him not to worry; that Abba Peter was rich and good and that he was pleased to have done what he had done. But the anchorite replied: ‘I will get no rest until I have given him the price’, I asked him if he had anything to pay with and he answered: ‘No, nothing at all, but give me a rough tunic to wear’ (for he was naked). I gave him the tunic and an old cloak and he went and worked on the reservoir which the Patriarch of Jerusalem (whose name was John) was constructing at Sinai. He received five copper coins pholleis a day so he came and stayed? near me at the Lavra of the A3liotes. He ate no more than ten lupin seeds a day and yet he worked all the day long. When he had saved up three pieces of gold out of the coppers he earned, he said to me: ‘Take the money and give it to him. If he will not accept  
 
it, give him back the book.’ I went off and told this to Abba Peter, but he would accept neither the book nor the price of it. I did, however, prevail on him to accept the price and not to disdain the anchorite’s labour. He took the money, whilst I went back and gave the book to the anchorite—who went off into the wilderness rejoicing.
