[[Spiritual Meadow]]
 
The same? friend of Christ® told us about a robber named Cyriacos whose thefts were committed in the area around Emius, known also as Nicopolis. He became so cruel and inhuman that they called him ‘the wolf”. There were other robbers with him; not only Christians, but also Judaeans and Samaritans too. One day—it was in holy week—some people from an estate in the region of Nicopolis came up to the Holy City to baptise their children. When the children had been baptised, they were returning to their own estate to celebrate Easter Day there. But they were confronted by the robbers on the way (the chieftain was not present). The men took to their heels. Casting aside the newly baptised children, the Hebrews and Samaritans seized the women and took possession of them, As the men fled, they ran into the chieftain of the robbers who asked them: ‘Why are you running away?’ They told him what had happened to them. He took them with him and went in search of his companions; he found the children stretched out on the ground. When he discovered who had perpetrated this atrocity, he beheaded the guilty ones. He had the men take up the little ones (because the women were unwilling to do so on account of their defilement by the robbers) and then he conducted them all safely to their own estate. A little while later, the robber-chief was arrested. For ten years he languished in gaol and no miler had him executed; finally, he was released. He would say over and over again: ‘It is thanks to those babes that I escaped bitter death. I used to see them in my dreams, saying to me: “Do not be afraid; we are  
 
putting forward the case for your defence”’. We met this man, I and Abba John, priest of the Lavra of the Eunuchs. He told us all this—and we glorified God.
