[[Spiritual Meadow]]
 
Concerning this master Cosmas the lawyer, many people told us many things; some one thing, others another. But most people told us a great deal. We shall write down what we saw with our own eyes and what we have carefully examined, for the benefit of those who chance to read it. He was a humble man, merciful, continent, a virgin, serene, cool-tempered, friendly, hospitable, and kind to the poor. This wondrous man greatly benefitted us, not only by letting us see him and by teaching us, but also because he had more books than anybody else in Alexandria and would willingly supply them to those who wished. Yet he was a man of no possessions. Through- out his house there was nothing to be seen but books, a bed and a table. Any man could go in and ask for what would benefit him—and read it. Each day I would go in to him and I never entered without finding him either reading or writing against the Jews. It was his fervent desire to convert the Hebrews to the truth. For this reason he would often send me to some Hebrews to discuss some point of Scripture with them, for he would not readily leave the house himself.  
 
One day I went to the house of Master Cosmas the lawyer and, as I was quite familiar with him, I said to him: ‘Of your charity, how long have you been leading the solitary life? hésuchazén’He  
 
kept his silence and gave no answer, so I asked again: ‘For the sake of the Lord, tell me’. He remained silent a little longer, then he told me: ‘For thirty-three years’, When I heard this, I glorified God. Another time I came to him and asked him: ‘Of your extreme charity, and in full knowledge that it is for the benefit of my soul that I ask you this; will you tell me what you have accomplished in so long a period of solitude and continence hésuchia...egkrateiaY He heaved a great sigh from the depths of his heart and said to me: "What shall a man Jiving in the world accomplish, especially a man who stays in his own house?’ Yet I begged him to tell me; for the Lord’s sake, and for the good of my soul, Finally, coerced by my persistence, he said: ‘Forgive me; there are three things I know of which I have accomplished: not to laugh, not, to swear and not to lie’. 
