[[Spiritual Meadow]]
 
We visited John the anchorite, known as ‘the red’, and he told us that he had heard Abba John the Moabite say that there was in the Holy City a nun monastria who was very devout, progressing in the service of God. The devil resented this virgin, so he implanted a satanic desire for her in the heart of a certain young man. That wondrous virgin perceived the demon’s subterfuge and foresaw the young man’s destruction. So she put some beans soaked in water into a basket and went into the wilderness. By her withdrawal she brought peace and serenity to the young man whilst she herself attained the security which is borne of solitide. A long time afterwards, by the providence of God, so that her virtuous conduct should not remain unknown, an anchorite saw her in the wilderness of the holy Jordan and he said to her: ‘Amma, what are you doing in this wilderness?’ Not wishing to reveal herself to the anchorite, she said to him: ‘Forgive me; the fact is that I have lost my way. But of your charity, father, and for the sake of the Lord, show me  
 
amy path.’ By divine inspiration he knew all about her. He said to her: ‘Believe me, amma, you have neither lost your way nor are you locking for the path. You know that lies are of the devil; so tell me the real reason why you came here’. Then the virgin said to him: ‘Forgive me abba; a young man was in danger of falling into sin on my account and, for that reason, I came into the wilderness. I thought it was better to die here than to be an occasion of stumbl- ing to somebody as the Apostle Paul, 2 Co 6:3 says.’ The elder asked: ‘How long have you been here?’ ‘Seventeen years, by the grace of Christ’, she replied. ‘What do you eat?’ asked the elder. She produced the basket containing steeped beans and said to the anchorite: ‘I brought this basket away from the city with me containing these few steeped beans and so great has been the providence of God to me that I have been able to eat of them all this time and they have not decreased. And this too you should know, father: that his goodness has so sheltered me that in all these seventeen years no man ever laid eyes on me until you did today. Yet for my part, I could see all of them.’ When the anchorite learned this, he glorified God. 
