[[Spiritual Meadow]]
 
This Dionysios the priest also told us this about the same man:  
 
One day the elder was out walking in the environs of the Sochas estate, which is where his cave was located. As he walked along, he saw a large lion approaching in the opposite direction and getting very near. The path along which he was travelling was very narrow and there was a hedge on either side of it; the kind of hedge that farmers use to fence their fields and which they plant with thorn- bushes. The thorns made the path so narrow that it was only just possible for one person (provided he were not carrying anything) to  
 
walk through it and through which a person walking would certainly not pass unscathed. As they drew nearer to each other, the elder and the lion, the elder would not turn back and yield the right of way to the lion, whilst the lion cou/d not turn round because the passage was so narrow. And it was impossible for them both to pass by. When the lion saw that the servant of God intended to go straight forwards and that he would under no circumstances retrace his steps, it stood up on its rear paws. When it was upright, it Jeaned against the hedge to the left of the elder. With its weight and its physical strength it widened the passage a little and this allowed the righteous man to continue his journey without interruption. Thus the elder came through, brushing against the lion’s back. After he had passed by, the lion got down from the hedge and went its own way.  
 
A brother visited Abba John and found nothing in the cave. He asked him: ‘How can you stay here, father, with no provision for you needs’? The elder replied: ‘This cave is a wrestling-ring; it is a matter of give and take’. 
