[[Spiritual Meadow]]
 
A priest named Peter, coming from Rome, told us concerning the saintly Gregory, pope of that city, that when he became pope, he built a large monastery for men, and made a rule that none of the monks should have anything of his own whatsoever, not even an obol. There was a brother there who had a brother in the world. To him he appealed, saying: ‘I have no shirt. Of your charity, buy me .one.’ The brother in secular life said to him: ‘Here are three pieces of gold; take them and buy yourself whatever you like.’ The monk took the three pieces of gold, then went and reported it to his higoumen, who, when he heard it, went and reported it to the most holy pope. When the blessed Gregory heard it, he excluded the brother from communion because he had contravened the rule of the monastery. A little while Jater, the excluded brother died and the pope did not Jearn about it. Two or three days later the higoumen came and reported to him that the brother had gone to his rest. The pope was grieved at this in no small way—for not having absolved the brother of the punishment of exclusion before he departed this life. So the pope wrote a prayer on a tablet and gave it to one of the archdeacons, He told him to go and read it over the brother. It was a prayer absolving the dead man from exclusion. The archdeacon went as he was commanded and read the letter containing the prayer over the brother. That same night the higoumen saw the dead brother. The higoumen said to him: ‘Are you not dead, brother?’ and he said: ‘Yes, indeed’. Then the abba asked him again: ‘Where were you until today?’ The brother said to him: ‘Truly, sir, I was in prison and I was not set free until yesterday’. Thus everybody knew that he was absolved of his  
 
exclusion in the very same hour at which the archdeacon said the prayer over the grave, and that his soul had been delivered from  
 
condemnation.
