[[Spiritual Meadow]]
 
FOR A RICH YOUNG MAN REDUCED TO PENURY  
 
‘We were told that the saintly Apollinarios, Pope of Alexandria, was outstanding for his almsgiving and compassion. To demonstrate this, they said that there was a young man whose parents were among the most prominent citizens of Alexandria. When they died, they left him their many possessions in the form of ships and gold, but he was unsuccessful in his management of this legacy and he lost everything, He was reduced to absolute poverty, not by eating and wasting his substance in riotous living Lk 15:13-14 but because he suffered shipwreck and divers other adversities. From being one of the great ones, he became small. As the Psalmist says: They mount up to the heavens above: they go down to the depths beneath Ps 106:26, so the young man, having been exalted in his riches, suffered a yet greater fall.  
 
When the blessed Apollinarios heard about this and saw the dejection and indigence which had befallen the young man, since he had known his parents and how well-off they had been, he wanted to do something practical to help him; to give him some smal] charitable donation to relieve his distress; but he was embarrassed over how to do so. Yet every time he saw the young man in his office he was wounded in the soul at the sight of his disreputable clothes and his sad countenance, which are the hall-marks of utter destitution. Whilst the pope was in this dilemma, one day, by the inspiration of God, he devised a wonderful plan which was suitable  
 
for his blessedness.  
 
He sent for the legal-officer of the most holy church, took him aside and said to him: ‘Can you keep a secret for me, Master Chancellor? He replied: ‘By the Son of God, I hope so, my lord. If it be your wish, I shal] not tell it to anybody , nor would anyone ever learn anything you revealed to your servant from my lips.” Then Pope Apollinarios said to him: ‘Go and draw up a letter of eredit against the most holy church in favour of Macarios, the father of the young man, for fifty pounds of gold. Have it witnessed and make an order for repayment, then bring that document to me’.  
 
The chancellor did what the pope had commanded immediately and without delay, then he brought the document and gave it to him. Since the father of the young man had been dead ten years or more but the paper was very new, the pope said: ‘Master Chancel- lor, go bury this paper in wheat or oats and bring it back to me in a few days’ time’. The man went away and came back again after the stated number of days, bringing the document to the pope. Then the pope said to the chancellor: ‘Now go and say to the young man: “What will you give me in return for a document which is to your advantage?”-—but see that you take no more than three pieces of gold from him, Master Chancellor. Then give him the document,” The chancellor replied: ‘In truth, my Jord, if it is your will, I will not even take as much as that’. The pope said: ‘No, I want you to take three pieces of gold’. At that the chancellor went to the young man as he was commanded, and said; ‘What will you give me if I provide you with something that will be of the greatest advantage to you?” The other agreed to pay whatever price was demanded. The chancellor thought for a moment, then said to the other: ‘Five or six days ago I was looking for some papers in my house and I found this document. And I remembered that Macarios, your father, (who trusted me) had left it with me for a few days, When he died, its fate was to lie forgotten in my house until this day, for it escaped my memory and it never came into my mind to give it to you.’ The young man said: ‘How much do you want me to give you for it?’  
 
‘Three pieces of gold’, was the reply. ‘And do you know whether the party that is in debt to me is rich?’ asked the young man. ‘Oh yes, rich indeed’, the chancellor replied; ‘Rich and generous. You shall easily be able to recover the debt.’ The young man said: ‘God knows I have nothing; but if the debt is repaid, I will give you the three pieces of gold and as much more as you will’. Then the chancellor handed over the document worth fifty pounds of gold 16,380 grams.  
 
The young man took the document to the most holy pope, prostrated himself at his feet and gave it to him. The pope took it and read it. Then he began to make himself look troubled. He said to the man: ‘Where have you been until now? Your father has been dead for more than ten years. Go away sir; I give you no response.” He said to the pope: ‘Really, my lord, I did not have the document; the chancellor had it and did not know. But God was merciful to him, for he has now given it to me, saying: “While I was looking for some papers I found this”’. The pope sent him away, saying: ‘I will think about it and, in the meantime, I will keep the paper here with me’. A week later the young man came back to see the pope, who again reproached him with taking so long to produce the document and again showed himself unwilling to give him anything. The young man said to him: ‘My lord, God knows that I do not have enough even to support my family. If God puts it into your heart to do anything, have compassion on me’. Then, pretending that he had just acceded to the man’s request, the saintly Apollinarios said to him: ‘I will repay you in full; but this, sir, I beg of you, brother: not to demand any interest of the holy church’, The youth fell 76 at his feet and said: “Whatever my lord requires of me, that will I do; and if he would like to reduce the capital, let him do so’. The pope said: ‘No, I am satisfied if you forego the interest’, Then he brought out fifty pounds of gold and dismissed the young man with many expressions of gratitude for having been excused the interest (as he said). This was how the godly Apollinarios worked in secret;  
 
this was the kind of beautiful deed he performed and the quality of his compassion. God so blessed that young man that he was able to rise up out of poverty and regain his former standing. He exceeded his parents in wealth and possessions and also greatly benefitted his soul.
