[[Spiritual Meadow]]
 
This is what was told to us by George, the Governor of the Province of Africa; a man who loved Christ, the monks and the poor; one who was endowed with all the virtues which are pleasing to God:  
 
In my homeland (he was from the district of Apamea in the second Eparchy of Syria from a town named Thorax) there is an estate called Gonagos forty miles from the city. Some children were pasturing animals about a mile away from the property. As is  
 
usually the case, these children wanted to play games the way children do, While they were playing, they said to each other: ‘Let us have a service and offer the holy sacrifice’, They all thought this was a good idea, so they chose one of their number to serve as priest and two others to be deacons. They came to a flat rock and began their game. They placed loaves on the rock which was to serve as an altar and some wine in an earthenware vessel. They took their places, the one who was to be priest and the two would-be deacons on either side of him. The ‘pricst’ recited the Prayer of Oblation proskomidé while the other two fanned the air with branches. The acting-priest found that he knew the Prayer of Consecration anaphora by heart, for in those days it was the custom for children to stand before the holy sanctuary during divine worship and to be the first after the clergy to partake of the holy mysteries. As it was also the custom in some places for the priests to say the prayer out loud, children were found to learn it by heart from continually hearing it audibly recited. They did every- thing according to the custom of the church; but, before they divided the bread, fire came down from heaven and consumed all the offerings, burning up the entire stone. Not a trace remained, neither of the rock nor of what had been set upon it. When the children saw this sudden phenomenon, they all fell to the ground and lay there, half dead. They could neither raise their voices nor get up from the ground. When they failed to return to the estate at the hour at which they usually came back (for they were lying stunned on the ground) their parents went out from the estate to find out why they had not returned as usual. They searched and found them lying there but the children could recognise nobody; nor could they reply when spoken to. When the parents saw them half dead like that, each one took up his own child and carried it back to the estate. They were staggered to see the children in such a strange condition, for they could not discover the reason for it. They questioned the children about it often, all day long, but they  
 
could get no response from them. It was simply impossible to find out what had happened to them until that day had passed and the night too. Then, little by little, the children became themselves again; and then they told their parents what they had done and what had happened. Then the parents set out with the children and with the proprietors of the estate and the children pointed out the spot where that extraordinary occurrence had taken place. They also indicated some traces of the fire that had descended. This convinced those who heard the story that it was true, so they went running to the city and reported everything in detail to the bishop of the city. He was amazed to hear so tall a story. He went out to the scene of the event together with all the clergy. He saw the children and heard from them what had happened. He also saw the evidence of the fire from heaven. He sent the children to a monastery and converted the place where the event happened into a distinguished monastery. He built the church on the spot where the fire had descended and erected the holy altar there.  
 
The same Master George told us that he had himself seen one of the children in that very monastery where this wonder had occurred, This is the divine and angelic wonder which was reported by George, the friend of Christ, to have happened in our own time.
