[[Spiritual Meadow]]
 
Rufinus, the ecclesiastical historian, reported something similar which happened a long time ago to children at play. It concerns Saint Athanasios, the great proclaimer and defender of the truth, the bishop of the great city of Alexandria, who shepherded all his charges prudently and according to the will of God. Speaking of the saint’s childhood, Rufinus shows how his elevation to the episcopate was originally foreshadowed by a revelation to him from God. Let us trace the history of this man, the kind of life he led as  
 
a child and the manner of his up-bringing, insofar as these things have come to our ears.  
 
The saintly Alexander succeeded Achilles as Pope of Alexandria, just as Saint Peter the martyr-archbishop foretold, he who con- demned the impious Arius. One day, Alexander was looking out to sea; he saw some children playing on the shore as children usually do. They were imitating a bishop and all the ceremonies which are customary in church. Paying careful attention to what was going on, he realised that they were acting out some of the secret parts of the mysteries. This troubled him, so he immediately summoned the clergy. He showed them what was taking place and required them to go and apprehend all those children and bring them to him. When they arrived, he asked them about the nature of their game and what they were doing. Being children, they were frightened, and at first they denied everything. But then they told him every detail of their game: how they had baptised some catechumens by the hand of Athanasios—whom those children had appointed as their bishop. Then Alexander enquired diligently of them which ones they had baptised and when he discovered that everything had been performed strictly in accordance with the customs of our religion, he informed his clergy of this, decreeing that those who had been made worthy of that holy bath stood in no need of a second baptism. He sent back to their parents Athanasios and the others who served as clergy, to be brought up in the fear and nurture of the Lord; especially Athanasios, whom he very soon afterwards consecrated to God. Being better endowed with godly attributes, he was advanced to a higher rank by the then-archbishop; such was his distinction. The archbishop summoned the parents of Athansios and of the other children whom the latter pretended to have as his priests and deacons in the game and, with God as his witness, handed them over to the church to be nourished therein.  
 
A little time elapsed during which Athanasios was thoroughly educated by a short-hand writer and well-enough by a grammar-  
 
school teacher. Then, as a sacred trust committed to them by the Lord, he was handed back to the priest by his parents and, like a second Samuel, he was raised in the temple of God. And when Alexander went to visit other bishops in his old age, he would have Athansios follow him, carrying the vestment of priesthood which is called ephod in the Hebrew tongue.  
 
So great were Athansios’ exertions against the heretics on behalf of the Church that it might seem as though that verse were especially written for him—the one which says: I will show him what he must suffer for my name’s sake. The whole world conspired to persecute him; the kings of the earth showed him what he must suffer for my name’s sake. The whole earth moved, kingdoms and an army came together against him. But he stood fast by the saying of God which says: Though a host of men were laid against me, yet shall not my heart be afraid. And though there ros¢ up war against _me yet will I put my trust in him Ps 26:3. But so many and such things are reported of him which are so important that they cannot be passed over in silence. Yet they are nevertheless so numerous that I am compelled do so in may cases. I am on the horns of a dilemma, not being able to decide what to retain and what to let go. That is why we are recording a few matters which are directly connected with the subject; the rest of them will be relayed by common report. Common report, however, can be relied on to relay less than the whole truth, for it has neither the ability nor anything to add to the truth.
