[[Spiritual Meadow]]
 
One of the fathers said there was a man living in the world who had a pious son, pure and temperate in all things, who, from his childhood, had not drunk wine. It was his intention to withdraw from the world. The father wanted him to become involved in business matters but the son was reluctant. There were other brothers. but he was the oldest. As his father's wishes and his own could not be reconciled, the father was always reproaching him and casting his temperance in his teeth, saying: ‘Why are you not like your brothers, and why do you not get yourself involved in business affairs?’ The son endured it all in silence; everybody loved him for his piety and his moderation sdéphrosuné.  
 
When the father was dying, some of the family, together with others who friends of Abibas, for that was the son’s name, came together and said: ‘Perhaps the father will deny the servant of God his inheritance’, for they thought that he hated his son from the way he used to revile him. They resolved to intercede with the father (who was sick) on his son’s behalf. They went to him and said: ‘We have a favour to ask of you’. He said to them: ‘What would you ask of me"? They said: ‘It concerns Master Abibas. We want to ask you not to despise him’. He said: ‘You want to ask a favour of me for him? They said they did, and he continued: ‘Call him here to me’. They thought he was going to reproach him as usual. When the son came in, the father told him to come near to him—which he did. And then the father collapsed in tears at his feet, saying: ‘Forgive me, my child, and pray to God that the wrong I have done you be not be held against me. For you were seeking for Christ and I was burying myself with worldly affairs.’ He called his other sons and said to them: ‘This is your master and your father. Whatever he says you may have, that you may have; and whatever he says you may not have, that you may not have’. They were all astonished. The father then died. Abibas gave to each brother his share of the inheritance and he took his own share too, but he gave it all to the poor, leaving nothing for himself. He built a small cell into which he could withdraw from the world and when the cell was completed, he fell ill. His end was approaching. His monastic brother was sitting with him, to whom the dying man said: ‘Go and keep company with your household, for it is a holy day’ (it was the feast of the Holy Apostles). The brother replied: ‘How could I go and leave you?’ The other replied: ‘Go; and when the time comes, I shall call you’. When the time came, he stood at the window and knocked. The brother heard and obeyed the sick man’s signal to come, As soon as he entered, the older brother surrendered his soul to the Lord. Everybody was amazed and glorified God, saying: ‘His end was worthy of the love with which he loved Christ’.
