[[Spiritual Meadow]]
 
In Thessalonica there was an archbishop named Thalilaios who feared neither God nor the reward which was in store for him. The wretch trampled christian teaching under foot and impiously treated the priestly dignity as nothing worth. He turned out to be a ravening wolf rather than a shepherd. He declined to worship the holy and consubstantial Trinity, turning instead (Oh Lord, forgive me!) to the worship of idols. So those who presided over the holy churches at that time expelled him by a canonical vote. A little while later however this man, so full of iniquity, wished to resume his priesthood. Since (as the most wise Solomon says) a// things are obedient to gold, he was recalled and ordered to return to his own diocese (for it was at Constantinople that the rulers lived, those of whom Isaiah spoke: Which justify the wicked for reward and take away the righteousness of the righteous man from him. Is 5:23)  
 
But God did not disregard his church. He reversed the judgement which had been pronounced in the bishop’s favour in contravention of the Apostolic canons. On a certain day when he was all dressed up splendidly and ready to go before the rulers in order to regain his priestly dignity by their decision, just as he was about to leave his house, his belly intimated that he was in need of the privy. When he had been two hours in there without coming out, some of those who stood by went in,—for they had to ask him whether he was coming out. They found him with his head down in the drain of the privy and his feet up in the air. He had gained for himself an equally well-matched eternal death as that which bore off Arius, the sacrilegious enemy of God, For Arius too, when his hopes ran high of being arbitrarily restored to the church by the cooperation if those in authority, the wondrous angel of the holy church of God and of the great council, scattered his bowels (bitterly afflicted with the labour-pains of blasphemy) in a privy. When Thalilaios hoped to continue the evil he had previously committed by the unjust intervention of those in authority, the angel who governed the Thesslonican church set out together with the great martyr Demetrios, And in the very place where he used to associate with the impure demon which provoked him and to contrive his onslaughts against the holy church of God; there, in that place, he nailed the unhallowed body of him, the unprofitable servant, and lifted up into the air those feet which would not walk in the way of righteousness, bearing the marks which indicated the judgement which awaited him; and that Jt is a terrible thing to fall into the Aands of the living God Heb 10:31. 
