[[Spiritual Meadow]]
 
Anastasios the Priest also told us that when Gébémer became the military governor of Palestine, his first act was to come and worship  
 
at the holy Church of the Resurrection of Christ who is God. As he was about to approach, he saw a ram charging at him intent on impaling him on its horns, So great was his fear that he stepped backwards towards the guardian of the Chapel of the Cross who was present, and also the lictors who stood by. They said to him: ‘What is the matter, your highness? Why do you not enter”? He said: ‘Why did you bring in that ram”? They were taken aback by this, but they peered into the holy sepulchre and saw nothing. So they spoke to him, urging him to enter and telling him that there was no such thing as a ram in there. A second time he made as though to enter and again he saw the ram charging at him and preventing him from entering. This happened several times, at least in Ais eyes. Those who were with him saw nothing and the guardian of the Chapel of the Cross said to him: ‘Believe me, your highness, there is something in your soul and it is because of this that you are prevented from worshipping at the holy and life-giving sepulchre of our Saviour. You would do well to confess before God, for he is kindly disposed towards humanity and it was to show mercy on you that he made you see this vision’. Bursting into tears, the governor said: ‘I am responsible for many great sins against the Lord’. He cast himself face down on the ground and remained weeping in that position for a Jong time, confessing to God. Then he got up and made as though to enter the sepulchre, but he could not enter. The apparition of the ram prevented him no less than before. Then the guardian of the Chapel of the Cross said to him: ‘There is still some other impediment’, The governor replied: ‘Could it be that I am forbidden to enter because I am in commu- nion with Severus, and not with the holy catholic and apostolic Church”? And he besought the guardian of the Chapel of the Cross that he might partake of the holy and life-giving mysteries of Christ our God. When the holy chalice arrived, he made his communion, and thus he entered and worshipped, no longer seeing anything which deterred him. 
