[[Spiritual Meadow]]
 
Scythopolis was the second city of Palestine. There I met Abba Anastasios who told us about Abba George the recluse: One night I got up to beat the wood -en signal (for I was the precentor) and I heard an elder weeping. I went and entreated him saying: ‘Abba, what is the matter, sir, that you weep so”? He answered me not a word. So I asked him again: ‘Tell me the cause of your grief.’ Sighing from the depths of his heart, he said to me: ‘How should { not weep, seeing that our Lord is not willing to be placated on our account? I thought I stood before one who sat on a high throne, my child.’ Around him were several tens of thousands who besought and entreated him concerning a certain matter, but he would not be persuaded. Then a woman clothed in purple raiment came and fell down before him saying: ‘Please, for my sake, grant this request’, but he remained equally unmoved. ‘That is why I weep and groan, for I am afraid of what is going to happen to me’. He said this to me at first light on the Thursday. The next day, Friday, about the ninth hour, there was a severe earthquake which overthrew the cities of the Phoenician coast. This Abba Anastasios spoke to us again and told us this about the same elder: Some time later, as he stood at the window of his cell, he began to weep and to say to me: ‘Woe are we, brother, for we have no compunction, but live heedlessly. I fear we are at the gates of perdition and that the wrath of God has overtaken us’. The next day, fire appeared in the sky. 
