[[Spiritual Meadow]]
 
Master Sophronios the sophist (before he embraced the monastic life) and I met Abba Palladios in Alexandria. He was a man who both loved and served God and he had his monastery at Lithazo- menon. We pressed him to speak an edifying word to us. The elder began to say to us: ‘Children, the time that remains to us is short. Let us struggle for a little in this world and Jabour, in order that we might have the enjoyment of very great things in eternity. Look at the martyrs, look at the holy men, look at the ascetics; see how courageously they persevered. We will ever wonder at the endurance of those whose remembrances have been preserved from time past. Every one who hears of them acknowledges with great astonishment the spperhusnan endurance of the blessed martyrs; how their eyes were plucked out; how the legs of some of them were cut off, others their hands, whilst some had their feet destroyed. How some were eliminated by raging fire whilst others were slowly roasted. How some were drowned in rivers, others at sea. How some were torn apart by carnivorous beasts like criminals whilst others were fed to birds of prey after suffering exquisite tortures. In brief, if it were possible to describe all the different tortures which were devised for their affliction, everything that the enemy, the devil, has inflicted upon the martyrs and ascetics who loved God, it would be seen how much they endured and how they have wrestled, triumphing over the weakness of the flesh by the courage of the soul. They attained to those good things for which they hoped by counting them more worthy than the trials of this earthly life. This provides a demon- stration of the solid quality of their faith in two ways. On the one hand, that having endured a little, they now enjoy great benefits in eternity. On the other hand, that they so cheerfully endured the physical torments with which the adversary the devil afflicted them. If therefore we endure affliction and persevere, with the help of God, we shall be found to be friends of God indeed. And God will be with us, fighting shoulder to shoulder with us in the battle, greatly alleviating that which we must endure. My children, since we know what kind of times these are and what kind of labour is required of us, let us strive for the self-knowledge which is attained by means of the solitary life. For at this stage it is required of us that we sincerely repent, so that we may indeed be temples of God. For it will not be honour such as the world gives that we will receive in the world to come’.  
 
Again he said: ‘Let us remember Him who has nowhere to lay his head’, Mt 8:20 and again: ‘Since Saint Paul says Trbu/ation worketh patience, Rm 5:3 let us make our minds able to receive the kingdom of heaven’. And again: ‘Children, Jet us not Jove the world, neither those things which are in the world’ \ Jn 2:15. Again the elder said: “Let us keep a guard over our thoughts, for this is the medicine of salvation’.  
 
We went to the same Abba Palladios with this request; ‘Of your charity, tell us, father, where you came from, and how it came about that you embraced the monastic life’. He was from Thessa- lonica, he said, and then he told us this: ‘In my home country, about three stades beyond the city wall, there was a recluse, a native of Mesopotamia whose name was David. He was a man of outstanding virtue, merciful and continent. He spent about twenty years in his place of confinement. Now at this time, because of the barbarians, the walls of the city were patrolled at night by soldiers. One night those who were on guard-duty at that stretch of the city- walls nearest to where the elder’s place of confinement was located, saw fire pouring from the windows of the recluse’s cell. The soldiers thought the barbarians must have set the elder’s cell on fire; but  
 
when they went out in the morning, to their amazement, they found the elder unharmed and his cell unburned. Again the following night they saw fire, the same way as before, in the elder’s cell—and this went on for a long time. The occurrence became known to all the city and throughout the countryside. Many people would come and keep vigil at the wall all night long in order to see the fire, which continued to appear until the elder died. As this phenomenon did not merely appear once or twice but was often seen, I said to myself: ‘If God so glorifies his servants in this world, how much more so in the world to come when He shines upon their face like the sun? This, my children, is why I embraced the monastic life.’ 
