[[Spiritual Meadow]]
 
On another occasion when we were visiting him, Abba Palladios told us about a Christ-loving man living in Alexandria, a man of great piety and mercy, hospitably disposed towards monks. He was married to a woman of singular piety who fasted all day long, and they had a six-year old daughter. One day this christian gentleman set out for Constantinople, for he was a merchant. He left his wife and child with one servant in the house and so departed to find a ship. As he was leaving to embark his wife said to him: ‘To whom are you commending us? The husband said: ‘To our Lady, the Mother of God’. One day as the mother was occupying herself with her tasks and the child was with her, the devil put it into the mind of the servant to murder the woman and her child, to seize all their possessions and to run away. He took a knife from the kitchen and went to the dining-room where the mistress was. But when he reached the dining-room door he was afflicted with blindness so that he was unable either to return to the kitchen or to go on into the dining-room. He spent over an hour flailing the air and making every effort to get in. Then he began to call for his mistress, saying: ‘Come here’. She was surprised that the servant was standing in the doorway and did not come to her, but rather called for her to come to him. She said to him: ‘Do you rather come here’, for she did not know that he had been struck blind. The servant began to entreat her with oaths to approach him and she swore that she would not. He said to her: ‘Then send the child to me’, but she would not do that either, saying: ‘If you want to, you come here.’ At that, seeing that he was incapable of doing anything to help himself the servant tumed the knife around and struck himself a mortal blow. When his mistress saw what he had done, she screamed out and the neighbours came in immediately. The police arrived too and found the servant still alive. They learnt everything from him and they glorified the God who showed wonders, saving both the mother and her child.
