[[Spiritual Meadow]]
 
One day Master Sophronios and I went to the house of Stephan the Sophist on a business matter and it was midday. He lived at the Church of the holy Mother of God which was built by the blessed Pope Eulogios and was known as Dorothea’s. When we knocked at the philosopher's house, a maid peered out of an upper window and said: ‘He is sleeping, but wait a while’. I said to Master Sophronios: ‘Let us go to the Tetrapylon and wait there’, This place called the Tetrapylon is held in very high esteem by the citizens of Alexandria for they say that Alexander (who founded their city) took the relics of the Prophet Jeremiah from Egypt and buried them there. When we came to that place, nobody was there except three blind men, for it was noon. We quietly came to where they were, without creating any disturbance—for we had our books with us. The blind men were conversing with each other and one of them said to another: ‘How in fact did you lose your sight?’ This was the reply: ‘As a young man I was a sailor. We set sail from Africa and on the high sea I developed ophthalmia. As I could not go and get treatment, white spots appeared in my eyes and I lost my sight’. And he said to the other: ‘Now, how did you come to be blind’? The man replied: ‘I was a glass-blower by trade and both my eyes began to discharge from exposure to the fire. Then I became blind’. These two now said to the third: ‘And you now, how did you lose your sight”? He replied: ‘Well now, I will tell you. When I was a young man, I thoroughly detested work; so I became a prodigal. When it came to the point where I had nothing to eat, I resorted to theft. One day, after I had accomplished many deeds of wickedness, I was standing in the market-place and I saw a richly decked-out corpse being taken for burial. I followed the cortége to see where they where going to bury the body. They went behind Saint John’s Church and placed it in a sepulchre; then they went their way. When I saw that everyone had gone, I went into the sepulchre and stripped the corpse of all its clothes—except for a single shroud. As I was leaving the sepulchre (taking a considerable amount of booty with me) my evil habits said to me: “Take the shroud too; it’s worth the trouble”, So, wretch that I am, I turned back and removed the shroud from the corpse, leaving it naked. At which point the dead man sat up before me and stretched out his hands towards me. With his fingers he clawed my face and plucked out both my eyes. I cravenly left all behind and fled from the sepulchre, badly hurt and chilled with horror. Now I too have told you how I came to be blind.’ When we had heard all this, Master Sophronios made a sign to me and we left the blind men, The he said to me: "You know, abba, I do not think we should do any business today, sir, for we have gained much profit from what we have heard’. We had indeed benefitted from that experience and, having benefitted ourselves, we have written it down so that you who hear these things might benefit from them too. It is a faot that no evil-doer can escape the notice of God. We heard this story with our-own ears from the very man to whom it had happened. 
