[[Spiritual Meadow]]
 
Some of the fathers told us about Abba George (Gregory) the anchorite who for thirty-five years travelled around naked in the wilderness. They said that when he was in the mountains in which the monastery of Abba Theodosios (at Skopelos) is located, he had a disciple who died. As the elder had no tools with which to dig a grave in which to bury the brother’s body, he went down from the mountain to the sea, and there he found a ship riding at anchor. He asked the shipmaster and the crew to come up into the mountain with him and bury the brother. They agreed willingly and, taking up the necessary tools, went up with him. They dug a grave and buried the brother’s body. One of the sailors, whose name was Thalilaios, very impressed with the virtue of the elder, asked him if he could stay with him. The elder told him that he would not be able to support the rigour of the ascetic life. The younger man replied that he was sure he could endure it. So he remained with the elder and was there for a whole year, making a great effort in ascetic endeavour. When the year was up, brother Thalilaios prostrated himself before the elder and said: ‘Pray for me father, for, thanks to your prayers, God has relieved me of suffering and T am no longer afflicted by discomfort, nor does this intemperate weather trouble me. I neither faint with the heat nor shiver with the cold; I am in great comfort’. The elder blessed him and brother Thelalaios remained with him for two and a half years; then he perceived that his end was near. He begged the elder: ‘Take me to Jerusalem so I can venerate the Holy Cross and the Holy Sepulchre of Christ our God; for these are the days in which the Lord will take me to himself’, The elder therefore took him and went to the Holy City. They worshipped at the holy and venerable places, then they went down to the holy Jordan and were baptised. Three days later, brother Thalilaios died. The elder buried him in the Copratha javra, Some time later, Abba George the anchorite himself departed this life and the fathers of the same lavra at Copratha buried him in their own church. 
