[[Spiritual Meadow]]
 
I took my lord Sophronios and we went in search of a’particularly distinguished elder, an Egyptian, at the lavra which is located eighteen miles from Alexandria. I said to the elder: ‘Abba, say something to us, sir, about the way in which we ought to live with each other, for my lord the sophist here has a desire to renounce the world’, The elder said: ‘Well done indeed, my child, if you renounce the world and save your soul. Settle yourselves in a cell. Where does not matter: only that you live there in sobriety and recollection, praying unceasingly. And have a good hope in God, my child, that he will send you knowledge of himself to illuminate your minds.’  
 
Again he said: “Children, if you wish to be saved, flee from people. Today there is no end of our knocking on doors, our travelling around all the cities and countryside, to see if there is anywhere we can snap up some gratification for our avarice and vain-glory and fill our souls with vanity’.  
 
Again the elder said: ‘Let us Mee, children, for the time draws nigh’.  
 
Another time, he said: ‘Ah, me! How we shall weep and repent for those things of which we do not repent now’!  
 
And again: ‘We do not retain the virtue of humility when we are praised to the skies, nor are we able to tolerate criticism. The one increases our vain-glory, the other brings grief to us poor, miserable creatures. No good thing is to be found where there is gtief and vain-glory.”  
 
Again: ‘Our fathers, who were great and wondrous, were the pastors of many. I, on the other hand, cannot even direct one sheep, but am always failing prey to wild beasts.”  
 
Again: ‘This is the way the demons work; after causing a sou] to fall into sin, then they cast us into despair to destroy us com- pletely. The demons are always saying to the soul: When will his name die and be destroyed? Ps 40:6 If the soul is one of sobriety,  
 
it will answer them and say: J sha// not die but Jive, and declare the works of the Lord Ps 117:17. Yet since the demons are very impudent, they will turn back on you, saying: Flee as a sparrow unto the hill Ps 10:2, We must answer them: God himselfis my saviour and my helper, I shall not be removed Ps 61:7,  
 
Again he said: ‘Do you be the door-keeper of your heart. And so that no alien may enter therein, say: “Are you on our side or the adversary's?”
