[[Spiritual Meadow]]
 
Abba Sergios of Raithou told us this about a brother from there called Menas, who became a deacon:  
 
He went out into the world to perform his ministry and what became of him we do not know, except that he put aside the monastic habit and returned to the world. A long time afterwards he went off to Theoupolis =Antioch and, as he was returning from Seleucia, he saw the monastery of the saintly Abba Symeon in the distance. He said to himself: ‘I will go up to see Symeon the Great’, (for he had never seen him). So up he went and came near to the column. When Abba Symeon saw him, he knew him for a monk, and as one who had been ordained a deacon, He called his servant, saying: “Bring the shears here’, then he said to the man who brought them: ‘Blessed be the Lord! Tonsure that man there’,—and with his very own finger he singled him out, for there were many people around the column, Menas was astonished at these words and he was seized by mighty dread. He patiently submitted without speaking, for he realised that God must have revealed the truth about him to the elder. Abba Symeon said to him: ‘Say the deacon's prayer’, and when the prayer had been recited, the saint said to him: ‘Begone to Raithou whence you came’, but Menas said he was ashamed and could not endure disgrace in the sight of men. The saint spoke to him again: ‘Believe me, child, you do not have to feel disgrace for this. The fathers will receive you with smiling faces and gladness at your return. Know this also: that God is going to put a sign on you that you might know that his gentle kindness has pardoned this sin.” When he came to Raithou the fathers received him with open arms and put him in the sanctuary //erateion. One Sunday, as he was carrying the holy and life-giving blood of the great God and our Saviour Jesus Christ, one of his eyes suddenly came out. By this sign they knew that God had forgiven him his sin, just as the righteous Symeon had foretold.
