[[Spiritual Meadow]]
 
We visited the Community of Salama, nine miles out of Alexan- dria, and there we found two elders who said they were priests of the church of Constantinople. [They spoke to us about Gennadios, the blessed Patriarch of Constantinople saying, that he was very gentle, pure of body and very much in contro! of himself.] And they told us this about him: that he was troubled by many people complaining about a cleric who was leading a very dissolute life, a man named Charisios. The patriarch sent for him and tried to correct him by exhortation, but when nothing was achieved by this, he proceeded to chastise and discipline him after the manner of a father and a churchman. The patriarch realised that this was doing the cleric no good, for now he was indulging in murder and dabbling in witchcraft. So he sent one of the agents in his service, ordering him to say to the holy martyr Eleutherios (in whose oratory Charisios served as lector): ‘Saint Eleutherios, your officer is a great sinner. Either reform him, or get rid of him.’ So the agent came to the oratory of the holy martyr Eleutherios and, standing before the altar, turning towards the apse, he stretched out his hand and said to the martyr: ‘Holy martyr of Christ, the Patriarch Gennadios declares to you, through me, sinner though I be, that your officer is deeply in sin. You are either to reform him or get rid  
 
of him.’ Next day, that worker of evil deeds was found dead. All were amazed, and glorified God.
