[[Spiritual Meadow]]
 
In Alexandria there were two wondrously virtuous men, Abba Theodore the philosopher and Zollos the reader; we were well acquainted with both of them, the one from his lectures, the other  
 
because we shared the same homeland and up-bringing- Abba Theodore had no possessions whatsoever, except for a philosopher's cloak and a few books. He slept on a bench whenever he came across a church. He finally renounced the world at the Community of Salama and there he ended his days. As for Zoilos the reader, he too was equally indifferent to possessions. He too had nothing but a philosopher's cloak, a very old suit and a few books. Calligraphy was his occupation. When he died in the Lord, he was buried at Lithazomenos, in the monastery of Abba Palladios.  
 
Some fathers went to Master Cosmas the lawyer and asked him about Abba Theodore the philosopher and Zoilos the reader: which of the two had progressed farther in the practice of asceticism? He replied: ‘They both had the same kind of clothing, the same kind of bed and the same kind of food. They both rejected anything that was in excess of basic necessities. They were equal in humility, poverty and self-discipline. But Abba Theodore, who went bare-foot and suffered greatly with his eyes, had learnt both the Old and the New Testaments by heart. But he had also the consolation of the company of the brethren, contact with friends; a not inconsiderable distraction when he was active and when he was teaching. In the case of Zoilos the reader, not only is his isolation from the world xeniteia praiseworthy, but so is his solitude erémia, his immense toil, the way he keeps his tongue on a leash. He had no friend, nothing to cal] his own, no-one to talk to; he engaged in no worldly activity; allowed himself no relief, nor would he accept the smallest service from anybody. He did his own cooking and washing; he allowed himself no pleasure from reading. He was ready to be of service to others; neither cold nor heat nor bodily sickness was of any account with him. He shunned laughter, sadness, inactivity, relaxation. For all the exiguity of his clothing he was constantly devoured by lice. Yet this man, in comparison with the first one, had no small consolation from his freedom of movement, for he was entirely free to go wherever he would, by night or by  
 
day. Yet even this freedom was of no avail because so heavy was his toil, that he never made use of it. Thus he appeared studiously to avoid over-much contact with the world, Each one of them shall receive his own reward, consonant with his toil, and the progress he made; with his spiritual and mental purity, his fear of God, his charity, his worship, his compunction katanu.xis, his constancy in psalm-singing and prayer, his persistent faith—and the good pleasure of God, which is hidden and concealed from people.
