[[Spiritual Meadow]]
 
Abba Gregory, priest of the Community of the Scholarii, told us that at Monidia there lived a monk who was an exceedingly hard worker, but somewhat indiscriminating in matters of faith. He would receive holy communion indiscriminately, in whatever church he happened to be, One day an angel of God appeared to him and said: ‘Tell me elder, when you die, how do you want us to bury you? The way the Egyptian monks bury the dead, or after the custom of Jerusalem?’ The elder said he did not know, and the angel replied: ‘Think about it. I will come to you three weeks from now and you shall tel] me.’ The elder went to a colleague and told him what he had heard from the angel. The second elder was utterly amazed at what he heard. He stared at the man for a long time; then, inspired by God, he said to him: ‘Where do you partake of the holy mysteries” The other replied: ‘Wherever I happen to be’. The elder said to him: ‘Never again should you communicate outside the holy catholic and apostolic Church in which the four  
 
  
 
 
 
holy councils are named: the council of the three hundred and eighteen fathers at Nicaea, that of the one hundred and fifty fathers at Constantinople, the first Council of Ephesos of two hundred, and that of the six hundred and thirty fathers at Chalcedon. And when the angel comes, say to ὁ μῖπε “T wish to be buried according to the custom of Jerusalem.”  
 
Three weeks Jater, the angel came sind said to him: ‘Which is it to be, elder? Have you given thought to the matter?” The elder replied that he wished to be buried according to the Jerusalem custom. The angel replied: ‘Very well, very well’, and the elder immediately surrendered his soul. This was done so that the elder would not lose his labour and be condemned as a heretic. 
