[[Spiritual Meadow]]
 
When we were at the ninth mile-post from Alexandria, we visited the monastery of Abba John the Eunuch for the benefit of our souls. There we found a very old man who had been at the monastery for about eighty years. He had more compassion than anybody we ever saw, not only for men, but also for animals. What did this ekder do? No other work but this: he would rise early and feed all the dogs at the lavra. He would give flour to the small ants, grain to the bigger ones. He would dampen biscuits and throw them up on the roof-tops for the birds to eat. Living like this, he left nothing to the monastery when he died, neither door nor window nor spy-hole not lamp nor table. In brief (not to say it all and make the story too long), he left nothing whatsoever of the world’s goods behind. Not even for one hour did he ever possess books, money or clothing. He gave everything to those in need, investing his entire concern in those things which were to come.  
 
Those who wished to make known his pity and compassion told us this about him:  
 
One day a farmer came and asked the elder to give him a piece of gold. As the monk had nothing to give (for he never did have gold in his possession) he sent and borrowed a piece of gold from the monastery and gave it to the farmer—who said he would repay it a month later. When, after two years, the gold had still not been returned (for the farmer did not have the wherewithal to pay), Abba John sent for his and said: ‘Give me the piece of gold, brother’. He answered: ‘As God knows well, I do not have it.’ ‘Then I have found a way in which you can repay me for it’, was the elder’s reply. The farmer, thinking that he was to be given some task to perform, said: ‘Tell me, and I will do it’. Then Abba John said: ‘When you have time to spare and no work to do, come and make thirty prostrations and I will pay you one keration’, and he gave the man something to eat and drink. So it was agreed with the man that, when he was free to do so, he would come, and when he had performed his prostrations, the elder would give him his reward, that is, one eration, He also gave him something to eat and drink and hard-tack enough for the five persons of his household. When he had saved up twenty-four keratia, which is equa! to one piece of gold, the elder received that sum from him and sent him on his way with his blessing. The same John, the Eunuch, told us:  
 
I came up into the Thebaid, the community of Abba Apollo, and there I saw a young brother whose father in the flesh was also a monk, The young man had made it rule for himself to drink neither water nor wine nor any other liquid as long as he lived. So he ate chicory and bitter herbs and those vegetables which had the ability of assuaging his thirst. His task was to put the loaves in the oven, After three years he fell ill and eventually went to the Lord. As he burned with fever and terrible thirst, everybody pressed him to drink a little, but the brother would not hear of it. The abba of the community summoned a doctor to do what could be done for the dying man; but when he arrived and saw the brother in such a  
 
miserable condition, he too pressed him to take a little drink—but without success. So he said to the abba: ‘Get me a large vessel’. He Poured four measures of tepid water into it and then had the brother put into it up to his thighs and made to stay there for about an hour. The godly elder John the Eunuch assured us (for he said he was present when they took the brother out of the water) that when the doctor measured the water, he found it to have been reduced by one measure. This is the sort of thing the ascetics endured in gaining complete self-mastery, il]-treating themselves for the sake of God, in order to attain to the good things of eternity. The same elder told us:  
 
I went to the cell of a certain elder in that community and I noticed that, where he used to prostrate himself, there was a slab; it was on that he would prostrate himself. Where his hands and knees touched, the slab was hollowed out to a depth of more than four fingers, so often did he prostrate himself.
