[[Spiritual Meadow]]
 
Somebody told of a brother who lived in a community and who used to be sent to conduct the business of his house. There was a devout secular person in a village who used to give him hospitality as an act of faith, as often as he came in and out of the village. This man had a daughter who had recently been widowed after living with her husband for a year or two. As the brother came in and out of their house, he began to be troubled by thoughts of her.  
 
As she was no fool, she realised this, and took care not to enter his presence. One day her father went into the neighbouring city on necessary business, leaving her alone in the house. The brother came, as was his custom, and finding her alone in the house, he said to her: ‘Where is your father?’ ‘He has gone into the city’, she replied. Then he began to be troubled by temptation and wanted to throw himself on her. She prudently said to him: ‘Do not be troubled; my father shall not return until evening; there are only the two of us here. But I know you monks never do anything without prayer. Get at it, then; pray to God, and if he puts it in your heart to do something, that we will do’. This was not accept- able to him, for temptation continued to rage within. She said to him: ‘Have you ever really known a woman?’ He said: ‘No; and that is why I want to know what it is like’. She said to him: ‘That is why you are troubled by temptation, for you do not know the bad odour of wretched women’. And to cool his ardour, she added: ‘I am having my period. Nobody can come near me or bear the smell of me for the stench which mars my body’. When he heard this and similar things from her, he regretted what had happened; he became himself again, and wept. When she realised that he was his normal self again, she said: ‘Look, if I had listened to you and given in to you, we would already have been satisfied—and would have sinned utterly. How then could you have looked my father in the face or gone back to your monastery and heard the choir of those holy ones who sing there? Be sober, I beg of you; and do not be so ready to lose all the sufferings you have endured and to deprive yourself of the good things of eternity, just for the sake of a little short-lived pleasure.’ When he heard what she had to say, the brother to whom it happened told it to him who now related the story, giving thanks to God who, by the woman’s prudence and temperance, had prevented him from taking an irremediable fall.
