[[Spiritual Meadow]]
 
When we were in Alexandria, a man who loved Christ told us a story along these lines. He said that there was an anchoress (Hovéotpia) who led a solitary life in her own home, cultivating her soul with fasting, prayers, vigils and by making many charitable donations. But the devil, always at war with the human race, could not tolerate the virtuous life of the maiden. So he stirred up a cloud of trouble for her. He inflamed a young man with satanic lust for her. The youth would wait for her outside her house. When she wished to go out, to go from her home to the oratory to pray, the youth would hinder her, forcing his attentions upon her in the way lovers do. The anchoress was so besieged by the attentions of the youth that she could not even set foot outside her own house. So one day she sent her maid to the youth with this message: ‘Come into the house; my mistress wants to see you’. The youth went in very gladly, thinking that his desires were about to be fulfilled. She was sitting at her loom. ‘Sit down’ she said to the youth, and seating herself, she said to him: ‘Now, brother, why do you persecute me like this, sir, and why will you not even let me out of my house?’ The youth answered: ‘Oh mistress, I want you so badly! Whenever I see you, I am all on fire, from head to toe.’ She said to him: ‘What do you see in me that appeals to you so that you love me so? The youth said: ‘Your eyes. It is your eyes which have seduced me.’ When the anchoress heard this, that her eyes had led the youth astray, she picked up her shuttle and pierced and cast out both her eyes with it. When the youth realised that it was because of him that she had put out her two eyes, he was so filled with remorse that he went away to Scété and distinguished himself as a monk. 
