[[Spiritual Meadow]]
 
Abba Palladios told us that an old fellow living in the world was arrested for murder. When he was tortured by the magistrate of Alexandria he said that somebody else had been involved in the murder as his accomplice, a young fellow about twenty years old. They were both severely tortured. The old fellow said: “You were  
 
with me when I committed the murder’. The youth denied having anything to do with the affair, nor had he been with the old fellow. When they had both been severely tortured they were condemned to be hanged. So they went out to the fifth mile-post from the city to where it is customary to punish such criminals. About one stade away there is a ruined temple of Kronos. When they came to the place, the populace and the soldiers wanted to hang the youth on the scaffold first. He made a profound act of obeisance before the soldiers and said: ‘For the sake of the Lord, of your charity hang me towards the east so that I may look in that direction when I am hanging there alone’. The soldiers said to him: ‘Why so”? He replied: ‘In truth, sirs, it is only seven months since your unworthy servant received baptism and became a Christian’. When they heard this, the soldiers wept over the youth. The old fellow called out in great anger: “By Serapis, hang me so I look towards Kronos!’ When the soldiers heard the blasphemy of the old fellow, they left the youth aside and hung the old one. And as they were doing this, a mounted messenger arrived from the prefect and said to the soldiers: ‘Do not execute the youth, bring him back’. This brought joy to all the soldiers who were there. They took him and brought him back into the praetorium, and the prefect released him. Having been rescued when he despaired of rescue, the young man went and became a monk. We have written this for the benefit of the many (and of ourselves, so we might be aware that the Lord knows how to deliver the godly from temptation).
