# On the Energy & Essence of God

Date Published: February 11, 2022
Featured: No
Status: Publish

*Saint Gregory Palamas*

Thus those who in our day disbelieve the teaching of the Spirit given through our holy fathers and who revile us when we agree with the fathers, say that if the divine energy differs from the divine essence, even though it is envisaged as wholly pertaining to God's essence, then either there will be many gods or the one God will be composite. They are unaware that it is not activating and energy but being acted upon and passivity that produce composition. God activates without in any way being acted upon or subject to change. Thus He is not composite on account of His energy.

Unless an essence has an energy distinct from itself, it will entirely lack actual existence and will be a mere mental concept. For man as a general concept does not think, does not have opinions, does not see, does not smell, does not speak, does not hear, does not walk, does not breathe, does not eat and, in short, does not have an energy which is distinct from his essence, and which shows that he possesses an individual state of being. Thus man as a general concept entirely lacks actual existence. But when man possesses an inherent energy distinct from his essence, whether it be one or many or all of those activities we have mentioned, it is known thereby that he possesses an individual state of being and does not lack actual existence. And because these energies are observed not only in one or two or three but in a great number of individuals, it is clear that man exists in countless individual states of being.

Let St Maximos now lend us his support. He writes in his Scholia that the providence creating existent things is identical with the processions of God. He says: 'The creative providences and goodnesses' - those that bestow individual essence, life and wisdom - 'are common to the tri-hypostatic differentiated Unity ' By stating that these providences and goodnesses are many and distinct, he shows that they are not the essence of God, since that is one and altogether indivisible. But because they are common to the tri-hypostatic differentiated Unity, he shows us that they are not identical with the Son or the Holy Spirit, for neither the Son nor the Holy Spirit is an energy common to the three hypostases. Yet by stating that they are not only providences and goodnesses but are also creative, he shows them to be uncreated. For if this were not the case, then the creative power would itself be created by another creative power, and that in turn by another, and so on to the uttermost absurdity, not even stopping at infinity. Thus God's processions and energies are uncreated, and none of them is either divine essence or hypostasis.

It is said that on the portals of Plato's academy were inscribed the words, 'Let no man enter who is ignorant of geometry.' A person incapable of conceiving and discoursing about inseparable things as separate is in every respect ignorant of geometry. For there cannot be a limit without something limited. But geometry is almost entirely a science of limits, and it even defines and extends limits on their own account, abstracted from that which they limit, because the intellect separates the inseparable. How, then, can a person who has never learnt to separate in his intellect a physical object from its attributes be able to conceive of nature in itself, for nature is not merely inseparable from the natural elements in which it inheres, but it cannot even exist at any time without them. How can he conceive of universals as universals, since they exist as such in particulars and are distinguished from them only by the intelligence and reason, being perceived intellectually as prior to the many particulars although in truth they can in no way exist apart from these many particulars? How shall he apprehend intellectual and noetic things? How shall he understand us when we say that each intellect also has thought and that each of our thoughts is our intellect? How shall he not ridicule us and accuse us of saying that each man possesses two or many minds? If, then, someone is unable to speak or conceive of things indivisible as distinct, how will he be able to discuss or be taught anything of this sort concerning God, with respect to whom, according to the theologians, there are and are said to be many unions and distinctions? But although the unions pertaining to God prevail over and are prior to the distinctions, they do not abolish them nor are they at all impeded by them. The followers of Akindynos, however, cannot accept nor can they understand the indivisible distinction that exists in God, even when they hear us speaking - in harmony with the saints - of a divided union. For to God pertains both incomprehensibility and comprehensibility, though He Himself is one. The same God is incomprehensible in His essence, but comprehensible from what He creates according to His divine energies: according, that is, to His pre-eternal will for us. His pre-eternal providence concerning us. His pre-eternal wisdom with regard to us, and - to use the words of St Maximos - His infinite power, wisdom and goodness. But when Barlaam and Akindynos and those who follow in their footsteps hear us saying these things which we are obliged to say, they accuse us of speaking of many gods and many uncreated realities, and of making God composite. For they are ignorant of the fact that God is indivisibly divided and is united dividedly, and yet in spite of this suffers neither multiplicity nor compositeness.

For a man to know God, and to know himself and his proper rank - a knowledge now possessed even by Christians who are thought to be quite unlearned - is a knowledge superior to natural science and astronomy and to all philosophy concerning such matters. Moreover, for our intellect to know its own infirmity, and to seek healing for it, is incomparably greater than to know and search out the magnitude of the stars, the principles of nature, the generation of terrestrial things and the circuits of celestial bodies, their solstices and risings, stations and retrogressions, separations and conjunctions and, in short, all the multiform relationships which arise from the many different motions in the heavens. For the intellect that recognizes its own infirmity has discovered where to enter in order to find salvation and how to approach the light of knowledge and receive the true wisdom that does not pass away with this present world.

Unless we bear with patience the afflictions that come to us unsought, God will not bless those that we embrace deliberately. For our love for God is demonstrated above all by the way we endure trials and temptations.