---
tags: #needsEdit 
---

links: [[HUB]] [[Prayer]]

---
*This prayer is taken from the [[Old Believer Prayer Book]] from the prayers before communion*
    
Many and great are the gifts which I have enjoyed from God Who created me, yet, passionate and ungrateful, I have not been mindful of all these gifts, but have reckoned myself with the irrational beasts and become like one of them. I am destitute of virtues, though rich in vices. I am full of shame, estranged from divine intimacy, condemned by God, mourned by angels, mocked and jeered by demons, and rebuked by mine own conscience. I am dead before death, judged before the judgment, and tormented before the endless torments. I am oppressed by despair. Lo! Owing ten-thousands of talents, I now take refuge in thy fervent intercession alone, O Lady. My Father's inheritance I have not saved, but have squandered it with harlots. Have mercy on me, O Lady, for I have sinned more than the harlot; I have outdone Manasses in iniquity; I have been a slave of stinginess, more merciless than the rich man; I am a vessel of wicked thoughts, a trove of foul and abominable thoughts; I am alienated from every good deed. Have mercy upon my lowliness; take pity upon my feebleness: for thou, as no one else, hast great boldness with the God Who was born of Thee; thou canst do all things as the Mother of God; in all things thou art mighty, as the sovereign Lady of creation; and nothing is impossible for thee if thou willest it. Only despise not my tears; let not my signs be repugnant to thee; turn not away from the afflictions of my heart. but by thy maternal prayers constrain the compassion of thy Son, the good God; make me, thy wretched and unworthy servant, worthy to assume the original goodness and put aside the ugliness of vice; to be liberated from sin and enslaved to righteousness; to strip off the concupiscence of fleshly pleasures and be clothed with the holiness of spiritual purity; to die to the world and live for virtue. Travel with me as I travel; sail the sea with me as I sail. Ever conquer the cruel demons who wage war against me. Strengthen me as I keep vigil. Ease my sleep. Support me when I falter. Heal me when I am sick. Deliver me when I am offended. Acquit me when I am slandered. When I am beset by death go before me speedily, and make me ever a terror to my visible and invisible foes, that all who unjustly oppress me may understand whose servant I am. Yea, most benign Lady, hear my poor prayers and put not my hopes to shame, thou hope of all the ends of the earth. Sill the stirrings of my flesh; calm the untimely fury which raiseth a storm in my soul; wipe from my mind the folly and insubordination of my vain youth; dispel from my heart the nocturnal dreams of evil spirits and the daytime deceits of impure thoughts. Instruct my tongue to speak what is profitable; teach mine eyes to safeguard virtue; make my feet run unfailingly along the blessed paths of God's commandments. Sanctify my hands and make them fit to be worthily lifted up unto the Most High. Purify my lips, that with boldness I may call upon the awesome and all-holy God as Father. Open mine ears, that sensibly and mentally I may hear the words of the Holy Scriptures, which are sweeter than honey and the honeycomb, and may keep them, strengthened by thee. Grant me time for repentance and the conversion of my thoughts Deliver me from sudden death. Renew me, who am condemned by my conscience. Before the end be with me. At the separation of my soul from my passionate body mitigate the unbearable sufferings; remove the unspeakable pains; comfort the inconsolable anguish; free me from the dark demons, the harsh accusers, the aerial toll-houses; and extricate me from the princes of darkness. Tear up the records of my many misdeeds; make me to dwell with God; at His dread judgment vouchsafe me a blessed place at His right hand; deliver me from eternal and unendurable torments, and make me an heir of eternal and incorruptible blessings. This audacious address I offer thee, O lady Mother of God, light of my darkened eyes, consolation of my soul, my mediatrix and my hope before God: unto Him do thou pray, for He is always well-disposed toward thee. Cleanse me of every impurity of body and soul, and make me worthy in the present age to partake without condemnation of the all-holy and most pure Body and Blood of thy Son and My God, and in the age to come to enjoy the sweet banquet of heaven and the food of Paradise, where dwell all who rejoice. May He grant the obtainment of these blessings to me, who glorify the majestic Name of thy Son and God, together with His unoriginate Father, and His all-holy, good and life-giving Spirit, now and ever, and unto the ages of ages. Amen.
