[[Spiritual Meadow]]
 
Abba Andrew of Messenia® told us:  
 
When I was a young man, my abba and I| withdrew from Raithou and came to Palestine where we stayed with an elder. The elder who was our host possessed one piece of gold; but he forgot where he  
 
had put it and began to suspect that I, young man that I was, had stolen it. The elder said to the fathers of the place: ‘Brother Andrew took the piece of gold’. My abba heard this. He called me and said: ‘Tell me, Brother Andrew, have you taken the elder’s piece of gold?” I said: ‘Spare me, abba; I took nothing’. I had a cloak however, so I sold it for one piece of gold. I took the coin, went to the elder and prostrated myself before him, saying: ‘Abba, forgive me, sir. Satan led me astray and I took your piece of gold’. There was a worldling there and the elder said: ‘Go away child; I have lost nothing’. Again I prostrated myself before him and said: ‘For the Lord’s sake, take the piece of gold (here, this is it) and pray for me; because Satan deceived me into stealing and causing you trouble’. The elder said: ‘Child, I lost nothing at all’. Because he could not convince me, the worldling said to me: ‘Of a truth, brother, when I came yesterday, sir, I found the elder in tears, prostrating himself in great affliction. When I saw him in so great tribulation, I said to him: “Of your charity, tell me what is matter with you”. He said to me: “I wrongly accused the brother of taking my piece of gold and, look! I have found it where I put it”. Then the elder was encouraged by the fact that, although I had not taken the piece of gold, I still brought it back to him, saying: “Take you piece of gold, for it was I who took it.”
