[[Spiritual Meadow]]
 
This story was told to us by Amma Damiana the solitary, the mother of Abba Athenogenes, Bishop of Petra:  
 
There was a higoumen at Mount Sinai who was truly great, and an ascetic, George by name. As he was sitting in his cell one Holy Saturday, this Abba George conceived a desire to celebrate the holy resurrection in the Holy City and to partake of the holy mysteries in the Church of the Holy Resurrection of Christ our God. All day long the elder continued in prayer meditating upon the validity of these thoughts. With evening, his disciple came and said: ‘Father, give the word for us to proceed to the canonical service’. The elder replied: ‘You go, and when it is time for holy communion, return home and I will come too. Then the elder stayed in his cell. When it came to the time for holy communion at the Church of the Holy Resurrection, the elder was found near the blessed Bishop Peter and he, together with the priests, was given commu- nion by the bishop. When the patriarch saw him, he said to his syncellos, Menas: ‘When did the abbot abbas of Sinai come here’? The syncellos replied: ‘With all due respect, my lord, I had not seen him until only this very instant’. Then the patriarch said to the syncellos: ‘Tell him not to go away; I want him to take food with me’, The syncellos went and said this to the elder, who responded: ‘The will of God be done’. When the elder had left the service and venerated the holy sepulchre, he found himself back in his cell again, and there was his disciple knocking at the door and saying: ‘Father, if you please, come and communicate’. The elder went to the church with his disciple and partook of the holy mysteries. Archbishop Peter was saddened that the elder should have disobeyed him. After the feast, he sent him a letter; likewise to  
 
Abba Photios, Bishop of Paran, and to the father of Sinai, telling them to bring the abba to him. When the carrier of the letters arrived and had delivered them, the abba sent three priests to the patriarch: Abba Stephan the Cappadocian, ‘the great’; Abba Zosimos of whom we have spoken above; and Abba Dulcitius, a Roman. The elder sought to justify himself by writing: ‘My most holy lord; God forbid that I should disregard your holy messenger’. Then he wrote this: ‘I would have your blessedness know that, six months from now, we are going to meet each other in the presence of the Lord Christ our God; and there, I will make an act of obeisance to you’. The priests went their way and gave the letter to the patriarch. They said it was many years since the elder had come up to Palestine. They showed him a letter from the Bishop of Paran certifying that for about seventy years the elder had not departed from the holy Mount Sinai. The godly and gentle Peter accepted as witnesses the bishops who were there and the clergy, who said: ‘We saw the elder and we all greeted him with a holy kiss’. Six months later, both the elder and the patriarch died, as the elder had foretold. The same Amma Damiana told us this too:  
 
On a Good- Friday before I was enclosed, I went to the Church of Saints Cosmas and Damian and spent the whole night there. In the evening, there came an old woman, a native of Phrygian Galatia, and she gave two lepta to everybody who was in the church. I knew her because she had often given me alms. One day a kinswoman of mine (and of the most faithful Emperor Maurice came to pray at the Holy City and stayed there for a year. Taking her with me, I went to Saints Cosmas and Damian. While we were in the oratory, I said to my kinswoman: ‘Look, my lady; when an old woman comes distributing two coins to each person, please swallow your pride and accept them’. With obvious distaste, she said: ‘Do I have to accept them?’ ‘Yes’, I said: ‘Take them, for the woman is great in the eyes of God. [She fasts all week long; and  
 
whatever she is able to gain by this discipline] she distributes it among those who are found in the church. She is a widow of about eighty years of age; take the coins she offers you and give them to somebody else, Do not refuse the sacrifice of this old woman.’ As we were speaking in this way, the old woman came in and began her almsgiving. In silence ard with serenity she came and gave me some coins. She gave some to my kinswoman too, saying: ‘Take these, and eat’. When she had gone, we realised that God had revealed to her that I had said: ‘Take them and give them a poor person’. My kinswoman therefore sent a servant of hers to get vegetables with the two coins. These she ate, and she affirmed before God that they were as sweet as honey. This both astonished her, and led her to give thanks to God who endows his servants with grace.
