[[Spiritual Meadow]]
 
There is a city in the Thebaid called Lycos. Six miles from it there is a mountain on which there are monks living: some in caves, others in cells. When we went there we met Abba Isaac the Theban, who said:  
 
Fifty-two years I was working at my handwork (I was making a large mosquito net) and I made a mistake, I was very upset about that mistake because I could not find it. I spent the whole day in distress and did not know what to do. Whilst I was so distraught, a youth came in through the window and said to me: ‘You have  
 
made a mistake, Give the work to me and I will put it right.’ I said to him: ‘Get out of here, you, and may it never be that I should do such a thing!’ He answered me: ‘But it will be pain and grief to you if you have done it badly’. I said to him: ‘There is no need for you to worry yourself about that’. ‘But I am sorry for you’, he rejoined, ‘because of your wasted effort’, and I said: ‘Neither you nor those who brought you are welcome here.’ But he replied: ‘Actually, it was you who compelled me to come here and you are mine’, I asked him how he could say that. ‘Because three Sundays running you have received holy communion whilst being at daggers-drawn with your neighbour’, he said—and I told him he was lying. But he said: ‘Are you not harbouring a grudge against him because of a plate of lentils? I am the one who is in charge of grudges and, from now on, you are mine.’ When I heard that, I left my cell, went to the brother in question and prostrated myself before him in order to become reconciled with him. When I returned, I found that my visitor had burned the mosquito net and that mat on which I had prostrated myself, because he was so consumed with jealousy for our love.
