[[Spiritual Meadow]]
 
Abba Sabbatios said: When I was living at the lavra of Abba Firminos, a robber came to Abba Zosimos the Cilician and begged him: ‘Of your charity, for God’s sake, make me a monk, for I am the author of many murders. Make me a monk so that for the rest of my life I may desist from my evil doings.’ The elder gave him instruction, made him a monk, and provided him with the holy habit. A few days later, the elder said to the new monk: ‘Believe me, my child, you cannot stay here. If the governor hears about you, be will arrest you. Or maybe your enemies shall pass this way and kill you, But pay heed to me; I will take you to a community some distance from here.’ He took him to the community of Abba Dorotheos, near to Gaza and to Maiouma. He spent nine years there, learning the entire psalter and all the conventions of monastic observance. The he went back to the Javra of Abba Firminos and said to the elder: ‘Abba, have pity on me, sir; give me back my worldly clothes and take the monastic habit from me’. Distressed by these words, the elder said to him: ‘Whatever for, child?” The other answered: ‘See now, father; as you know, I have been nine years in the community. J have fasted to the full extent of my ability; I have practised self-discipline; I have lived under obedience with complete serenity and in the fear of God. I believe that, of his goodness, God has pardoned my many evil deeds. Yet every day I see an infant which says to me: “Why did you slay me?” I see him in church, I see him in the refectory, always saying the same thing to me, The vision never leaves me untroubled for an hour at a time. This is why I want to go away, father. I must die for that infant, for  
 
I killed it without reason.’ He took his clothes, put them on, and went out of the lavra. He went to Diospolis. The following day he was arrested and beheaded.
