[[Spiritual Meadow]]
 
The most holy Dionysios, priest and sacristan of the most holy church of Ascalon, said to us concerning Abba John the Anchorite: ‘This was a man who, in our own generation, was truly great in the eyes of God’, and as a demonstration of the extent to which he was pleasing to God, he related this miracle attributed to him:  
 
This elder lived in a cave in the district of the Socho estate, almost twenty miles from Jerusalem. In the cave he had an icon of our all- holy and spotless Lady, the Mother of God and ever-virgin Mary, holding our God in her arms. Sometimes this elder would decide to go somewhere. on a journey; maybe a great distance into the  
 
wilderness, or to Jerusalem to reverence the Holy Cross and the Holy Places, or to pray at Mount Sinai, or to visit martyrs shrines many a long day’s travel from Jerusalem. He was greatly devoted to the martyrs, this elder. Now he would visit Saint John at Ephesos; another time, Saint Theodore at Euchaita or Saint Thecla the Isaurian at Seleucia or Saint Sergios at Saphas. Some- times he would go to visit this saint, sometimes another. Yet whenever he was about to set out, it was his custom to prepare and light a lamp. He would stand in prayer, beseeching God to make straight the way which-lay before him; running towards her icon, he would say to the Lady: ‘Holy Lady, Mother of God: since I am about to undertake a Jong journey of many days’ duration, watch over your lamp and keep it from going out, as I intend that it should not. For I am setting out with your help as my travelling- companion.’ Having said this to the icon, he would set off on his journey. When he returned from his proposed trip, maybe a month or two months or three months later, even sometimes after five or six months, he would find the lamp well cared for and alight, just as he had left it when he set out on his journey. He never saw it go out of its own accord; not when he awakened from sleep or when he returned to his cave from a journey or from the wilderness. 
