[[Spiritual Meadow]]
 
At the community of the Cave of Saint Sabas, we visited Abba Eustathios, the higoumen. He told us:  
 
There was a merchant at Tyre called Moschos. This is what he told us when we were in Tyre:  
 
When I was engaged in commerce, late one evening I went to bathe. On the way I came across a woman standing in the shadows. I went up and greeted her; she agreed to follow me. I was so diabolically delighted that I did not bathe but went straight to dinner. I did my best to persuade her but she would not consent to taste a morse]. Finally, we got up to go to bed and, as I began to embrace her, she let ont a tremendous cry and broke into tears, saying: “What a woeful wretch I am!’ I was trembling as I asked her what was the matter, She wept even more and said: ‘My husband is a merchant and he has been shipwrecked. He lost both his own property and others.’ Now he is in prison because of the others’ losses. I am at my wits’ end what to do and how to get bread for him. I decided, in great shame, to sell my body; it was to get bread. They have taken everything from us.’ I said to her: “How much is owing?’ She said: ‘Five pounds of gold.’ =360 pieces, or 1638 grams of gold I took out the gold and gave it to her, saying: ‘For fear of the judgement of God, I have not touched you. Go, redeem your husband with this gold, and pray for me.”  
 
Some time later, certain slanders against me reached the ears of the emperor to the effect that I had squandered my merchandise. The emperor sent and seized all my estate, dragged me to Constanti- nople in my shirt and delivered me into prison. I lay there for some time in the old shirt. Everyday I heard that the emperor intended to put me to death. I despaired of my life; it was in tears and lamenta- tion that I went to sleep. I seemed to see that free woman whose husband had been in prison. She said to me: ‘What is the trouble, Master Moschos? Why are you imprisoned here?’ I told her that I had been falsely accused and that I thought the emperor intended to put me to death. She asked me: “Do you want me to speak to the emperor about you and have you set free?’ I said to her: ‘Does the emperor know you?’—and she said he did. I awoke and I was confused as to what this could be. A second and a third time she appeared to me and said: ‘Have no fear; tomorrow you go free’.  
 
At dawn they took me to the palace on the emperor's orders. When I went in and he saw me with my disreputable garment, he said to me: ‘I am moved to compassion for you; go, and act correctly in the future’. I saw that woman standing at the emperor’s right hand. She said to me: ‘Take heart and do not be afraid’, The emperor gave orders for my property to be restored to me. He gave me many goods and re-appointed me to my former position with great honour and he made me his representative.  
 
That very night the same woman appeared to me and said: ‘Do you know who I am? It was upon me that you took pity when, for the sake of God, you respected my body. Behold, I have delivered you from danger. So you see how kindly God deals with men. That is how you dealt with me, and I have extended my mercy towards you."
