[[Spiritual Meadow]]
 
Abba Theodore, higoumen of the Old Lavra, told us that there were two brothers, Syrian money-dealers, at Constantinople. The  
 
elder brother said to the younger: ‘Come, let us go down to Syria and take possession of the paternal home’. The younger said: ‘Why both of us? We would have to leave the business unattended. You go, and I will stay here. Or let me go, and you stay here.’ They came to an agreement that the younger should go. A little while after his departure, the brother who stayed at Constantinople saw an elder in his sleep who said to him: ‘Do you know that your brother has committed adultery with the tavern-keeper’s wife?’ When he got up, he was distressed. He said to himself: ‘This is my fault. Why did I let him go alone?’ A little later, he saw the same elder again, saying to him: ‘Do you know that your brother has forced his attentions on the tavern-keeper’s wife?’ The brother was -Brieved again at this. A third time, a little later still, he saw the same elder saying: ‘Do you know that your brother has destroyed an honest woman and has degraded himself with the tavern-keeper’s wife?’ He wrote from Constantinople to Syria to him, to leave everything and return to Byzantium at once, without delay. When the younger brother received the letter, he immediately left every- thing and went back to his brother. When the elder brother laid eyes on him, he took him to the Great Church and began to reproach him with a heavy heart, saying: ‘Did you do well in fornicating with the tavern-keeper's wife?’ When the other heard this, he began to swear by almighty God that he did not know what his brother was talking about; that he had never had sinful intercourse, nor any intercourse at all except with his lawful wife. When the elder brother heard this, he said to him: ‘Have you then done something even worse?’ He denied it: I am not aware of having done anything irregular, except that I found monks in our village of the Severan persuasion. Not knowing whether this was a bad thing, I made my communion with them. I have not done anything else, so far as 1 am aware.’ The elder brother realised that his brother’s fornication consisted of his having left the holy catholic Church for the heresy of Severus Acephalos, a tavern-keeper indeed.  
 
In this he had fallen into disgrace and besmirched the nobility of the true faith.
