[[Spiritual Meadow]]
 
We came too the hospice of the Fathers at Ascalon and there Eusebios the priest said to us:  
 
There was a merchant of our city who set sail and lost all his own goods and everything else he was carrying at sea. He alone was saved, When he came back he was seized by his creditors and thrown into prison. Everything in his house was confiscated. There was nothing left to him except what he and his wife stood up in. Although she was in great distress and anxiety, she made it a rule at least to feed her husband with bread. One day, as she was sitting eating with her husband in prison, a person of note came in to distribute some comforts to the inmates. When he saw the woman who was free to come and go sitting with her husband, he was smitten with desire for her, for she was exceedingly good-looking. He sent a message to her through the gaoler and she came to him with a light heart, expecting to receive some charity. He took her aside and said to her: ‘What is the matter? Why are you here? She told him the whole story and he said to her: ‘If I discharge your debt, will you sleep with me tonight? She, who was very beautiful and very pure-minded, said to him: ‘My lord, I have heard the Apostle Paul; 2 Co 7:1-7 say that a wife does not have authority over her own body: her husband has. Let me go and ask my husband, sir, and I shall do what he commands,’ She came and told the whole matter to her husband. He was a wise man who loved his wife dearly; he did not let the prospect of freedom lead him astray. Sighing deeply and shedding tears, he said to his wife: ‘Go and refuse the man, sister, and Jet us hope in God that he will not  
 
abandon us at the last’. She got up and sent the man away, saying: ‘I told me husband and he was unwilling’.  
 
At that time, there was a highway man who had been thrown into the inner prison. Observing all that passed between the husband and his wife, he sighed to himself and said: ‘Look what a situation they are in—yet they would not surrender their honour e/eu- theria neither for money, or to be set free. They held chastity to be of more worth than al] riches and they despised all the things of this life. And what shall I do, wretch that I am, who have never even thought about the question of whether there is a God—and on that account, I am responsible for so many murders.’ He called them over and through the window of the cell where he lay, he said to them: ‘I was a robber and many are the evil deeds and the murders I have committed. And for that reason, when the governor comes and I appear before him, I shall die as a murderer. Yet when I saw your chastity, I was moved with compassion for you. Go to such-and-such a place by the city-wall; dig there, and take the money you find. You are to have it to discharge your debts and to make many charitable donations. Pray for me, that I might receive mercy.”  
 
A few days later, the governor came to the city and ordered the robber to be brought out and beheaded. The day afterwards, the woman said to her husband: ‘Is it your wish, sir, that I go to the place revealed by the robber and see if he was telling the truth’? He said to her: ‘Do what you think best’. She got a small mattock and in the evening she went and dug at the spot he had mentioned. She found a covered pot with gold in it. She used it very prudently, giving it out a little at a time (as though she were borrowing from this one and from that one) until she had discharged all their debts. Then she was also able to get her husband out. The man who told us this story said: ‘Behold, even as they were faithful to the law of God, so did our Lord and God multiply his mercies on them’,
