[[Spiritual Meadow]]
 
One of the higoumens said:  
 
An elder was living near our community, a good man in spiritual matters. A brother lived near him. When the elder was somewhere else, the brother was incited to open his cell door, go in and take the elder’s books and vessels." When the elder came, he opened the cell door and found his equipment stolen. He went and told the brother about it and, there were his things, right there in plain view (for the brother had stowed them away). The elder did not want to put him to shame or condemn him, so he pretended that his belly was troubling him. He went out and stayed away for as long as it would take to do the necessary, long enough for the brother to stow away the vessels out of sight. Then the elder returned and began to ask about some other matter, and did not accuse the brother. Some days later, the elder’s equipment was found. They arrested the brother and threw him into prison, but the elder learned nothing about it whatsoever. When he eventually heard that the brother was in prison, he did not know wéy he was in prison. ‘He came to me’, said the higoumen, ‘for he visited us frequently, and he said to me:  
 
“Of your charity, give me a few eggs and some white bread.” I said to him: “Obviously, you have guests today”, and he said he had. He was in fact taking those provisions to the prison to offer some comfort to the brother. When he entered the prison, the brother fell at his feet and said: ‘It is on your account that I am here, abba. It is I who stole your equipment. But look: your book is in such-and- such a place and your vestment is in such-and-such a place.” The elder said to him: ‘Be assured, child, that is not why I came; neither was I in the least aware that it was because of me that you are here. But hearing that you were here, I was grieved and came to offer you some comfort. See, here is white bread and some eggs. And I will do everything I can until I get you out of prison.’ He went and interceded with some important people, for he was known to them for his virtue. They sent and released the brother from prison.
