[[Spiritual Meadow]]
 
There is a market-town in Cyprus called Tadai which contains a monastery located near a place called Philoxenos. When we arrived there, we found in the monastery a monk called Isidore, a native of Melitene. We noticed that he was always in tears and groaning. Everybody tried to persuade him to desist a little from his lamenta- tion, but he would not be comforted. He told them all: ‘I am as great a sinner as there has been from Adam to this day’. We said to him: ‘But abba, in truth, sir, nobody is really sinless except one: God himself’. He said: ‘Believe me, brethren, I have found no sin amongst men which I have not committed, whether I have learnt it from writing or by hearsay. If you think that 1 am accusing myself unjustly, hear of my sin so that you can pray for me. In the world’, he said, ‘I had a wife and both she and I were of the Severan persuasion. One day when I came home I could not find my wife, but I heard that she had gone to a neighbour's to take communion. Now he was a communicant of the holy catholic church, so I ran immediately to stop my wife. As I entered the neighbour's house, I  
 
found my wife exactly at the point of receiving the holy portion and making her communion. I grabbed her by the throat and forced her to emit the holy portion. I seized it and threw it up and down and it fell in the mud. All at once I saw a flash of lightening take up the holy communion from the spot where it lay. And two days later I saw a black-faced one wearing rags who said to me: “You and I are alike condemned to the same damnation”, and I said: “Who are you”? The black-faced one who had appeared to me replied: “I am he who struck the cheek of the Creator of all things, our Lord Jesus Christ, at the time of his passion”. It is on this account’ said the monk ‘that I cannot desist from weeping’. 
