[[Spiritual Meadow]]
 
There was an actor at Tarsos in Cilicia whose name was Babylas and he had two female companions: one named Cometa, the other Nicosa, He led a disorderly life, performing deeds which were truly worthy of the demons who urged him on. One day he went into church and by the providence of God, the gospel was being read in which there is the verse which says: ‘Repent ye, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand’, This struck him forcibly; he began to reproach himself with tears for the evil of his ways. As soon as he came out of church, he called his two companions and said to them: ‘You know how I have lived in disorderliness with you and never preferred one of you over the other, Now you are to have every- thing I possess for your own. Take all that I have and share it; for this very day I am going to renounce the world and become a monk’. The women replied as though with one voice and in tears: “We have shared with you in the experience of sin and in the destruction of our own souls; now that you have decided on this course of action which is pleasing to God, will you keep us out of it and do it alone? Indeed you shall not! Let us also be partakers with you of the good’. The actor immediately shut himself up in one of the towers of the walls of the city. The women sold their property and gave the proceeds to the poor, then they too received the monastic habit. After that they made a cell for themselves near the tower and shut themselves up in it. I happened upon it myself and profited from the experience. The man is very compassionate, very forgiving and humble-minded. I wrote this for the benefit of those who chance to come upon it. 
