[[Spiritual Meadow]]
 
When I was in Antioch the Great I heard one of the priests of the church saying the Patriarch Anastasios had told something of this sort:  
 
A monk of the monastery of Abba Severian was sent to serve in the district of Eleutheroupolis. He put up at the home of a Christ-loving farmer, the father of a daughter (his only child) whose mother was dead. When the monk had been some days in the farmer’s house, the devil (he who is always contending with humanity) thrust unclean thoughts upon the brother. He became disturbed concerning the maiden and sought an opportunity to have his way with her. And the devil who was responsible for this disturbance himself took care to provide the desired opportunity. The maiden’s father took himself off to Ascalon to deal with some pressing business. Knowing that there was nobody in the house but the maiden and himself, the brother approached her with the intention of forcing his attentions upon her. When she realised how disturbed he was and how he burned with desire for her, the maiden said to him: ‘Do not be so excited and do not act ignobly toward me; my father will not return either today or tomorrow. But first listen to what I have to say to you and then, the Lord knows, I will do anything you wish’. And she began to reason with him saying: ‘You, brother, how long have you been in your monastery, sir? He said: ‘Seventeen years’. She replied: ‘Have you had any experience with a woman?’ and he said he had not. The maiden answered the brother: ‘And you wish to destroy all your labour for the sake of an hour's pleasure? How many times have you poured out tears that you might present your flesh spotless and without stain to Christ? And now you are willing to dissipate all that labour for the sake of a short-lived pleasure?  
 
And if I do as you wish and you fall into sin with me, have you the wherewithal to assume responsibility for me and to support me?” The brother confessed he had not, whereupon the maiden replied and said to him: ‘In truth, this is no lie: if you disgrace me, you will be the cause of many evils’. The monk said to her: ‘How so?’ The maiden replied: ‘You will destroy your soul and, in the second place, you will have to answer for my soul. To make you aware of this, I will convince you with an oath. If you disgrace me, I swear by Him who said Thou shalt bear no false witness that I will hang myself. Thus you will be found guilty of murder too, and in the judgement you will be judged as a murderer. Rather than become the cause of so much evil, go back to your monastery. You will have plenty to do in praying for me.’ The brother became himself again and recovered his normal state of mind. He left the farm and went away to his monastery where he fell prostrate before the higoumen with the prayer that he might never again for the rest of his life go out of the monastery. He lived for three months and then passed over to the Lord. 
