[[Spiritual Meadow]]
 
We once paid a visit to Abba Cyriacos the priest at the Lavra of Calamén on the Holy Jordan and he told us this story:  
 
One day, in my sleep, I saw a woman of stately appearance clad in purple and after her I saw two reverend and honourable men standing outside my cell. It seemed to me that the woman was our Lady the Mother of God and that the men with her were Saint John the Divine and Saint John the Baptist. I went out of my cell and invited them to come in and offer a prayer in my cel], but she would not agree to my request. I persisted at some length, entreating her and saying: Oh Jet the simple not go away ashamed Ps 73:21 and much else. When she realised that I was importunate with my invitation, she answered me coldly, saying: ‘How can you ask me to enter your cell when you have my enemy in there?’ With these words she went away. When I awoke, I began to worry and to wonder if I might have offended her in my thoughts, for there was nobody in the cell but me. I examined myself at some length and could find no fault which I might have committed against her. As it seemed that I was about to be overcome with remorse, I rose up and took up a scroll, intending to read it, thinking that perhaps reading would alleviate my distress. It was a book I had borrowed from Hesychios, priest of Jerusalem. I unwound it and found two writings of the irreligious Nestorios written at the end of it—and immediately I knew that he was the enemy of our Lady, the holy Mother of God, So I rose up and went off and gave the book back to him who had given it to me. I said to him: ‘Take your book back, brother, for I have not derived as much benefit from it as it has brought adversity upon me’. When he asked me how it had caused me adversity, I told him what had happened. When he had  
 
heard about it all, he immediately cut the writings of Nestorios off from the scroll and threw the piece into the fire, saying: ‘The enemy of our Lady, the holy Mother of God, shall not remain in my cell  
 
either’. 
