[[Spiritual Meadow]]
 
They also told us this:  
 
It used to be the custom for the poor and the orphans of the region to come here on Maundy Thursday to receive half a peck of grain or five loaves of blessed bread, five small coins, a pint of wine and half a pint of honey. For three years prior to this happening which we are about to tell, grain had been scarce and in this area it was selling at one piece of gold for two pecks. When Lent came round, some of the brethren said to the higoumen: ‘Abba, do not make provision for the customary dole to the poor this year, sir, lest the monastery not have enough for the brethren—for grain is not to be found’, The abba began to say to the brethren: ‘Children, let us not discontinue the charity of our father Theodosios. Behold, it is his commandment and it would be held against us if we disobeyed it. It is he himself who will look after us’. But the brethren continued to argue with the abba, saying: ‘We cannot give the accustomed charity for we do not have anything to give’. Then the higoumen was deeply grieved but he said to them ‘Go then and do what you will’. The customary charity therefore was not distributed that Maundy Thursday. But on Good Friday morning, the brother in charge of the granary opened up and found that what grain they did possess had germinated. So they ended up throwing it all into the sea. Then the abba began to say to the brethren: ‘He who sets aside the commandments of his father suffers these afflictions. You are now reaping the fruits of disobedience. We were going to part with five hundred pecks =125 bushels of grain and, in doing so, to serve our father Theodosios by our obedi- ence. Also to bring consolation to our brethren the poor. Now about five thousand pecks =1250 bushels of grain has gone to ruin, what good has it done us, brethren? We have twice been guilty of wrong-doing: once in that we transgressed the precept of our father, and again in that we did put our trust not in God, but in our granary. So let us learn from this experience, my brethren, that God watches over all humanity; and that Saint Theodosios invisibly cares for us, his children’. 
