[[Spiritual Meadow]]
 
Our holy father, Abba George, archimandrite of the monastery of our holy father Theodosios which lies in the wilderness of the Holy City of Christ our God, told this to me and to brother Sophronios the Sophist:  
 
I had a brother here known as George the Cappadocian. He used to do manual work at Phasaelis. One day when the brothers were making loaves of bread, brother George was heating the oven. But when he had heated the oven he could not find the implement for wiping it out—because the brethren had hidden it to put him to the test. So he went in to the oven and wiped it out with his garment. And he came out again not in the least harmed by the fire. When I heard of this I reproved the brethren for putting him to the test. The same abba, our father George, also told us this about the same brother George: One day he was pasturing swine in Phasaelis when two lions came to seize a pig. He took up his staff and chased them as far as the holy Jordan. Again this same father of ours spoke to us saying: When I was about to build the Church of Saint Kerykos at Phasaelis, they dug the foundations of the church and a monk, very much an ascetic, appeared to me in my sleep. He wore a tunic of sack-cloth and on his shoulders he had an over-garment made of rushes. In a gentle voice he said to me: ‘Tell me, Abba George, did it really seem just to you, sir, that after so many labours and so much endurance, I should be left outside the church you are building? Out of respect for the worth of the elder, I said to him: ‘Who in fact are you, sir”? He said: 'I am Peter the grazer of the holy Jordan.’ I arose at dawn and enlarged the plan of the church. As I dug, I found his corpse lying there, just as I had seen him in my sleep. When the oratory was built, I constructed a handsome monument in the right-hand aisle, and there I interred him. 
