# On the Jesus Prayer

Date Published: February 11, 2022
Featured: No
Status: Publish

*Excerpt from Unseen Warfare*

There have been and still are men of prayer who preferred one short prayer and repeated it constantly. St. Cassian says that the prayer usually repeated in his time by everyone in Egypt was the first verse of Psalm lxx: ‘ Make haste, O God, to deliver me; make haste to help me, 0 Lord.” It is written in the life of St. Joanniky that he repeated the following prayer: ‘ The Father is my hope, the Son is my refuge, the Holy Spirit is my protection.” He also added it to each verse of the thirty psalms he learnt by heart, which constituted his rule of prayer. Another constantly used as prayer the following words: ‘ Being a man I have sinned; but Thou, being God the Compassionate, have mercy on me.’ Others, of course, preferred other prayers. From the most ancient times the prayer chosen by a great many was: ‘Lord Jesus Christ, Son of God, have mercy on me, a sinner.” We find indications of it in St. Ephrem, St. Chrysostom, St. Isaac of Syria, St. Hesychius, St. Barsanuphius and John, and St. John of the Ladder. Later it became more and more general, began to be on everyone’s lips and became part of the Church’s statutes, where it is offered in place of all prayers said at home and of all church services. This is why it is now used with us more than any other short prayer. I advise you too to acquire the habit of it.

This prayer was called the Jesus Prayer because it is addressed to our Lord Jesus. Like any other short prayer, it is verbal; but it becomes and should be called mental, when it is said not only in words, but also in mind and he art, with both consciousness and feeling of its content, and especially if, through long and attentive practice, it becomes so merged with the movements of the spirit, that the words disappear and only these movements are seen within.—Every short prayer can reach this degree. Pre-eminence belongs to the Jesus prayer because it unites the soul with our Lord Jesus, and the Lord Jesus is the only door to union with God, which is the aim of prayer. For He Himself said: ‘No man cometh unto the Father, but by me’ (John xiv. 6). Thus a man, who acquires it, acquires also the whole force of dispensation by incarnation; and in this lies our salvation. Hearing this, you will not be surprised that those who strove after salvation neglected no effort in trying to form the habit of this prayer and to become possessed of its power. You too should imitate their example.

Externally,  acquiring  the  habit  of  this  prayer  consists  in  reaching  the  point  where  it  turns  on  your  tongue constantly  by  itself; internally, it consists in concentrating the attention of the mind in the heart and in constantly standing there in the presence of the Lord, with varying degrees of heartfelt warmth, repulsing all other thoughts, and above all falling at the feet of our Lord and Saviour with contrition and humility. The first step towards this habit is to repeat this prayer as often as possible with attention in the heart. Frequent repetition, becoming established, collects the mind into one, standing in the presence of the Lord. Establishing this order within is accompanied  by warmth of heart and by repelling of all thoughts, even simple and not only passionate ones.  When  the flame of cleaving to the Lord begins to be constantly alight in the heart, then, together with this, a peaceful ordering of the heart will be established within, with contrite and humble inner prostration before the Lord. We are brought thus far by our own efforts with the help of Divine grace. Anything beyond this which may be attained in the work of prayer will be a gift of grace alone. The holy fathers mention this only lest, having reached this limit, a man thinks that he has nothing further to wish for and imagines that he has attained the summit of perfection in prayer, or in spiritual achievement.

Thus, your first task is to repeat the Jesus prayer as often as you can, until you acquire the habit of repeating it unceasingly. Do it in this way:

(1)  Reserve  in  your rule  of  prayer  a  place  for  the  Jesus  prayer.  Repeat  this  prayer  several  times  at  the  beginning  of  your  recital  of prayers, and several times at the end. If you have the zeal, do the same after every prayer which enters into your recital, imitating St. Joanniky the Great, who, after every verse of the psalms, included in his rule of prayer, repeated his short prayer: ‘The Father is my hope, the Son is my refuge, the Holy Spirit is my protection.”

(2)  As  to  the  number  of  times  you  should  repeat  this  prayer  and  on  what  occasions,  you  should  decide  this  yourself,  or  ask  the advice of your spiritual Father. Only do not undertake too much at first, but increase the number of repetitions gradually, as your enjoyment of this prayer grows. If the desire comes to double the set number, do not deny it to yourself, but take it not as a set rule, but only for this occasion. And whatever the number of such repetitions your heart demands, do not refuse it.

(3) Do  not  hurry  to  pass  from  one  prayer  to  another,  but  recite  them  with  measured  deliberation,  as  you  are  wont  to  address  a request  to  some  exalted  personage.  Yet  take  care  not  only  of  the  words,  but  rather  that  your  mind  should  abide  in  the  heart, standing there before the Lord, as though He were present, with full consciousness of His greatness, grace and truth.

(4) If you have free time, then, between one time of set prayer and another, give yourself the task of stopping, as you do when you stand up to pray, and send to the Lord this prayer, repeating it several times. If you  have  no free time,  insert this  prayer  inwardly everywhere in the intervals of your occupations, and even of your talking.

(5) Doing  this  prayer  during  your  rule,  or  standing  in  the  posture  of  prayer  between  rules,  after  each  repetition  make  a  bow—ten times from the waist, and then a full prostration, and so on till the end. You have, of course, heard or read that in their instructions on prayer the holy fathers ordain a great many bows. One of them said: ‘ Prayer is not sufficient unless in praying a man wearies his body with bows.” If you decide to follow this advice, as much as you can, you will soon see the fruit of your labour in acquiring the habit of the Jesus prayer.

(6) As  regards  further  instructions,  indications  and  warnings  about  the  Jesus  prayer,  read  in  the  Philokalia  Simeon  the  New Theologian, Gregory of Sinai, Nicephore the monk, Callistus and Ignatius. The teachings of all other fathers about inner prayer can also be applied to the prayer of Jesus. Take note that in the instructions of the aforementioned fathers you will find directions as to
how to sit, how to hold one’s head, how to breathe. As Callistus and Ignatius said, these methods are not essentially necessary, but are merely external aids, not suitable for everyone. For you it is sufficient to keep your attention in the heart, before the face of the Lord  and  to  send  Him  this  short  prayer  with  reverence  and  humility,  with  bows  if  you  are  standing  for  your  rule,  or  with  only mental prostration, when you do it during your usual tasks.

(7) Note also, that attention should be in the heart, or inside the breast, as some fathers say, namely, a little above the left nipple, —and  there  the  Jesus  prayer  should  be  repeated.  When  the  heart  begins  to  ache  with  tension,  follow  the  advice  of  Nicephore  the monk,  namely,  leave  that  place  and  establish  yourself  with  your  attention  and  with  the  words  of  the  prayer  where  we  usually converse with ourselves, namely under the Adam’s apple in the upper part of the chest. Later again descend over the left nipple. —Do not disdain this remark, however simple and unspiritual it may seem to you.

(8)Reading  the  holy  fathers,  you  will  find  many  warnings.  All  of  them  are  the  results  of  experience  in  wrong  practices.  To  avoid these  faults,  you  should  have  a  counselor—your  spiritual  Father,  or  a  colleague  of  the  same  mind,  with  whom  you  can  talk,  and verify  with  him  all  that  occurs  while  you  perform  this  task.  As  to  yourself,  act  always  in  a  state  of  complete  simplicity  and  great humility, never attributing success to yourself. You must know that true success comes within, unnoticeably, without ostentation, as is  the  case  with  the  growth  of  a  body.  Thus,  if  a  voice  cries  inside  you:  “Here  it  is!’—know  that  it  is  the  voice  of  the  enemy, presenting to you something imaginary instead of the real. Here lies the origin of self-delusion. Stifle this voice immediately, lest it goes on in you like a trumpet, feeding vainglory.

(9)  Do  not  set  a  time  for  achievement  in  this  prayer.  Decide  only  one  thing:  to  work,  and  to  work.  Months  and  years  will  go  by before the first feeble indications of success begin to show. One of the Mount Athos fathers said of himself that two years of work passed  before  his  heart  grew  warm.  With  another  father  this  warmth  came  after  eight  months.  With  each  man  it  comes  in accordance with his powers and his diligence in this work.